# Day 53

Life is about living, not just being alive. It's about learning and growing and making mistakes. It's about forgiveness and finding what things make you who you are. It's about being getting hurt and getting the fuck back up every time you do. There's not a person on this giant rock that has never went through something difficult or heartbreaking. When you get your heart pulled out of your chest by someone who you made your entire world, you take some time to put it back in your chest and you grieve over it, take the time for it to heal while you seek out the things you really want for yourself.

Life is not about taking all your pain and emotions and keeping them locked up inside you while your defenses continue to build more walls so they'll never escape. That doesn't make you stronger it makes you hard to fucking love and makes you destroy the people who love you and what for? See here's the thing, I get it, some people don't like to get hurt, they don't like to get sad but I'm sorry to tell you these are things you must feel and you must deal with in order to actually love another human being. You can't just justify your defenses by saying "I don't want to get hurt" ain't no damn person out there who just wants to get hurt so shut the fuck up about that dumb shit. What you end up doing by not letting yourself open up for the possibility to be hurt is actually shutting that one person who cares about you out and you end up doing the exact bullshit to that person that you have avoided being done to you. You want to learn how to love and what it's really like to love someone else. Open the fucking door and welcome in the chance for somebody to hurt you. I've learned that no matter how much pain and heartache sucks it's made me appreciate wanting to be loved and wanting to love someone even more. Don't be a fucking asshole with these excuses you make for not wanting to get hurt. The majority of people just want to be loved as much as you do. Nobody comes into your life just to say "hey bitch imma wreck yo life on purpose". Quit being a bitch and let your guard down cause you will never truly love someone the right way until you give them that possibility to one day hurt you.
