EagleFiler 1.9.9 Manual

C-Command Software
c-command.com

October 17, 2022


Contents

1  Introduction                                                 7

1.1  Importing Is a Snap                                           7

1.2  Familiar Mail-like Interface                                       8

1.3  Search Everything                                            9

1.4  The Library Is Open                                          10

1.5  Reliable Data Storage                                         11

1.6  Add Tags and Notes                                          12

1.7  Speed Up and Simplify Your Other Applications                          15

1.8  Multiple Libraries                                           15

1.9  Feature List                                              15

2  Installing and Updating                                         19

2.1  Requirements                                              19

2.2  Installing EagleFiler                                          19

2.3  Updating From a Previous Version                                  20

2.4  Reinstalling a Fresh Copy                                       20

2.5  Uninstalling EagleFiler                                         21

2.6  Security & Privacy Access                                       21

2.6.1  Granting Full Disk Access                                   22

2.6.2  Granting Automation Access                                 25

2.6.3  Troubleshooting Privacy Access                               28

3  Using EagleFiler                                             29

3.1  Basics                                                  29

3.2  Library Folders                                             29

3.3  What Can Be Imported                                        33

3.4  Ways to Import                                             34

3.4.1  Applications That Support Capture                             35

3.4.2  Importing Existing Files                                    40

3.4.3  Importing Web Pages and URLs                               40

3.4.4  Importing Text Snippets                                    43

3.4.5  Importing From a Scanner                                   43

3.4.6  The To Import Folder                                    45

3.4.7  The Files Folder                                       46

3.4.8  Services                                             47

3.4.9  Save PDF to EagleFiler                                    47

3.4.10 Share Extension                                        48

3.4.11 Importing iMessages                                      48

3.4.12 Importing From iOS                                      48

3.4.13 Importing via a Quick Action                                 50

3.4.14 Importing via PopClip                                     50

3.5  Importing Mail                                             51

3.5.1  Importing Mail From Apple Mail                               53

3.5.2  Importing Mail From Airmail                                 58

3.5.3  Importing Mail From Entourage                               59

3.5.4  Importing Mail From Eudora                                 59

3.5.5  Importing Mail From GyazMail                                59

3.5.6  Importing Mail From MailMate                                59

3.5.7  Importing Mail From Mail Pilot                               60

3.5.8  Importing Mail From Mailsmith                               60

2


3.5.9  Importing Mail From Mbox Files                               60

3.5.10 Importing Mail From Outlook                                 61

3.5.11 Importing Mail From Outspring Mail                             63

3.5.12 Importing Mail From Postbox                                 63

3.5.13 Importing Mail From PowerMail                               64

3.5.14 Importing Mail From Thunderbird and Eudora 8                     64

3.5.15 Importing Mail From Webmail/Gmail                            65

3.6  Drag and Drop                                             65

3.7  Shortcuts                                                66

4  Browser Windows                                            70

4.1  Source List                                               70

4.2  Records List                                              74

4.3  Record Viewer                                              75

4.4  Searching                                                76

4.4.1  Search Query Syntax                                      79

4.4.2  Searching Within Records                                   80

4.4.3  Searching From Other Applications                              80

5  Menus                                                    82

5.1  The EagleFiler Menu                                          82

5.1.1  About EagleFiler                                        82

5.1.2  Software Update                                        82

5.1.3  Purchase                                            83

5.1.4  Mac App Store                                         84

5.2  The File Menu                                             86

5.2.1  New Library                                          86

5.2.2  New Record ▷ Rich Text File                                 87

5.2.3  New Record ▷ Plain Text File                                 87

5.2.4  New Record ▷ From Clipboard                                 87

5.2.5  New Record ▷ Open Stationery Folder                            87

5.2.6  New Folder                                           88

5.2.7  New Tag                                             88

5.2.8  New Browser Window                                     88

5.2.9  New Tab                                            89

5.2.10 New Smart Folder                                       89

5.2.11 Edit Smart Folder                                       89

5.2.12 Open Library                                          92

5.2.13 Close & Lock                                          93

5.2.14 Scan for New Files                                       93

5.2.15 Import Files                                          94

5.2.16 Import URLs                                          94

5.2.17 Import Bookmarks                                       94

5.2.18 Import ENEX File                                      95

5.2.19 Import from iPhone Camera                                  96

5.2.20 Export                                             96

5.2.21 Backup Metadata                                       97

5.2.22 Empty Trash                                          98

5.2.23 Print                                               98

5.3  The Edit Menu                                             98

5.3.1  Undo/Redo                                           98

5.3.2  Copy                                               98

3


5.3.3  Copy Source URL                                       99

5.3.4  Copy Record Link                                       99

5.3.5  Paste/Paste and Match Style                                 99

5.3.6  Find ▷ Library Search                                      99

5.3.7  Find ▷ Find                                           99

5.3.8  Find ▷ Find Next/Previous                                  100

5.3.9  Find ▷ Use Selection for Find                                 100

5.3.10 Spelling and Grammar                                    100

5.3.11 Substitutions                                         100

5.3.12 Transformations                                        100

5.4  The View Menu                                            100

5.4.1  Show Tab Bar                                         100

5.4.2  Show All Tabs                                        101

5.4.3  Message ▷ Raw Source                                    101

5.4.4  Message ▷ Plain Text                                     101

5.4.5  Message ▷ Rich Text                                     101

5.4.6  Message ▷ Use Quick Look                                  102

5.4.7  PDF ▷ Next/Previous Page                                  102

5.4.8  Show ▷ Source List                                      102

5.4.9  Show ▷ Record Viewer                                    102

5.4.10 Show ▷ Deleted Messages                                   103

5.4.11 Show ▷ Messages in Records Source                             103

5.4.12 Show ▷ Messages in Tag Sources                               103

5.4.13 Allow Editing in Record Viewer                               103

5.4.14 Open in New Window                                    103

5.4.15 Enter Full Screen                                       103

5.5  The Go Menu                                             104

5.5.1  Enclosing Record                                       104

5.5.2  Contents of Record                                      104

5.5.3  Previous/Next Record                                    104

5.6  The Record Menu                                           104

5.6.1  Mark as Unread/Read                                    104

5.6.2  Mark as Flagged/Unflagged                                 104

5.6.3  Tag                                              105

5.6.4  Edit Notes                                           105

5.6.5  Set Label                                           105

5.6.6  Move To                                           105

5.6.7  Batch Change                                         105

5.6.8  Convert for Editing                                      107

5.6.9  Verify                                             107

5.6.10 Update Checksum                                      108

5.6.11 Merge Mailboxes/Message Files                                108

5.6.12 Reply to Message                                       109

5.6.13 Open With External Viewer                                 109

5.6.14 Open With                                          109

5.6.15 Open Source URL                                      110

5.6.16 Quick Look                                          110

5.6.17 Slideshow                                           110

5.6.18 Reveal in Finder                                       110

5.7  The Format Menu                                           110

5.8  The Window Menu                                          111

4


5.8.1  Show Info                                           111

5.8.2  Show Tags                                          112

5.8.3  Show Tag Cloud                                       114

5.8.4  Activity                                            115

5.8.5  Drop Pad                                           116

5.8.6  Errors                                             117

5.9  The Help Menu                                            117

5.10 The Dock Menu                                            117

6  Settings                                                  118

6.1  Capture key                                              119

6.2  Capture with options                                        120

6.3  Quick entry                                              121

6.4  Web page format                                           122

6.5  Spotlight comments                                          123

6.6  Fonts                                                  123

6.7  Search highlight color                                        123

6.8  Quoted Text Colors                                          123

6.9  Remember open libraries between launches                             124

6.10 Copy tags to Spotlight comments                                  124

6.11 Allow duplicate files in library                                    124

6.12 Esoteric Preferences                                         125

7  Extending EagleFiler                                          133

7.1  AppleScripting EagleFiler                                      133

7.2  Writing Capture Scripts                                       134

7.3  Writing Stationery Scripts                                      137

8  Frequently Asked Questions (FAQ)                                 137

8.1  How can I access my library from multiple Macs?                         137

8.2  How can I put my library on my iPhone?                              140

8.3  How can I encrypt my files?                                     142

8.4  Where is my EagleFiler library?                                   143

8.5  How can I rebuild a library?                                     144

8.6  How can I run optical character recognition (OCR) on my PDFs?                145

8.7  How can I move messages between mailboxes?                          146

8.8  How can I copy my tags to another library?                           146

8.9  How do Finder tags work with EagleFiler?                             147

8.10 How does indexing in EagleFiler work?                               148

8.11 Why does EagleFiler import the wrong Web page when I press the capture key?        152

8.12 How can I speed up EagleFiler?                                   152

8.13 Why doesn’t my serial number work?                                153

8.14 Should I download EagleFiler from this free site?                         153

8.15 How can I open the Library folder?                                 154

8.16 How can I back up my EagleFiler data?                               155

8.17 What information should I include when I report a problem?                   155

8.17.1 Sending in an Error Report                                 156

8.17.2 Sending in Screenshots                                    157

8.17.3 Sending in a “Sample” Report                                157

8.17.4 Sending in Crash Log Files                                 158

9  Legal Stuff                                                158

5


10 Version History                                             165

6


1  Introduction

EagleFiler is an easy-to-use information manager. It lets you organize and search mail, Web pages, 
PDF
files, notes, and more. Use it to collect stuff from a variety of sources. Browse everything using 
a standard
three-pane interface. Organize using folders and annotate using tags and notes, or just leave 
everything in
one  folder and pin-point what you need instantly using the live search. Since EagleFiler stores 
its library in
Finder format, it works smoothly with your other favorite Mac applications.

EagleFiler in a nutshell:

1. With a single keypress, import a Web page, mail messages, a scrap of text, or any file on your
Mac.

2. EagleFiler stores them in an open format: regular files and folders that are fully accessible to
your other applications.

3. Optionally: encrypt the files, add tags, notes, color-coded labels, and other metadata.

4. Browse by folder or by tag, or use the live search to find the information you need (faster than
Spotlight).

5. View, edit, or create documents directly in EagleFiler’s streamlined interface, or double-click 
to
edit using a more specialized application.

What can you do with EagleFiler? EagleFiler is a digital filing cabinet, a research assistant, and 
a snippet
collector. You can use it to write a journal, track all the files for a project or job, save your 
favorite Web
articles, store financial statements, run a paperless office, plan a trip, collect your course 
notes, archive your
e-mail correspondence, search mailing list archives, research a purchase, remember recipes to cook 
or books
to read, store scientific papers, gather legal case notes, or assemble a scrapbook. It’s the most 
flexible tool
on your Mac.

1.1  Importing Is a Snap

Getting your information into EagleFiler is easy. When you’re viewing a Web page in Safari or 
Chrome,
looking at a mailbox in Mail, or browsing files in the Finder, just press the capture key (F1 by 
default, or
Option-F1 to see the options below). EagleFiler will save the document into its library, and you 
can go right
on working without interrupting your flow. (Of course, you can also use drag and drop or other 
methods
if you prefer.) Once the document is in EagleFiler, you’ll always have a copy of the way it looked 
when
you imported it. No more bookmarking a great article, only to find out later that the page is no 
longer
available or that registration or even payment is now required. If you do research on the Web, you 
know
that pages change—sometimes without notice—so it’s always good to keep a paper trail of exactly 
what you
read. There’s no shame in being a digital pack rat when today’s Macs ship with tens or even 
hundreds of
gigabytes of storage.

7


1.2  Familiar Mail-like Interface

EagleFiler browser windows use a three-pane view that’s familiar to any Mail user. This is not a 
database
front-end; it’s a real Mac application with a fully Aqua user interface. Click on one or more 
sources to view
their contents. Enter some text in the search box to filter the record list. Click on a record to 
view it right
there in the window. HTML mail messages can be viewed as rich text, or you can view e-mails as 
plain text,
complete with color-coded quoted text and clickable links. You can open as many windows as you want 
to
view different parts of the library.

8


1.3  Search Everything

It’s no good to store your information if you can’t find it when you need it. Fortunately, 
EagleFiler offers
some powerful search options. If you know the title, author, or recipient you’re looking for, you 
can search by
one of those fields. Or, use EagleFiler’s indexed search to look through the entire contents of 
your documents.
Like Spotlight, EagleFiler can search different types of files at once—after all, what matters is 
what you’re
looking for, not whether it’s in a PDF, an e-mail, or a chat.

9


Unlike Spotlight, EagleFiler makes it easy to narrow down the results. You’re searching within the 
library,
not all the files on your hard disk, so the search is fast. You can select one or more folders or 
mailboxes
within the library to restrict the search—reducing the amount of data that EagleFiler has to look 
through,
and number of results that you’ll have to comb through. You can even do Boolean, tag, and 
phrase-based
searches to tell EagleFiler exactly what you’re looking for. Once you’ve narrowed the search 
results to a
manageable number of documents, it’s easy to find the information you’re looking for because you 
can view
the document contents right there in EagleFiler.

For more complex searches, or for quick access to your most common searches, you can create your own
smart folders.

1.4  The Library Is Open

Like iTunes and Photos, EagleFiler keeps your data in a library. The library is just a special 
folder in the
Finder that EagleFiler manages, so there’s no lock-in. You shouldn’t re-arrange the files and 
folders in the
library except through EagleFiler, but other than that you can treat it just like a regular folder. 
Browse its

10


contents in the Finder or Path Finder¹—the folder structure matches the folders in EagleFiler.

View and edit the files using your favorite applications. Drag key files to the Dock or make 
aliases of them on
your desktop. Search the files using Spotlight. Back them up using Time Machine. Label files in 
EagleFiler,
and the labels automatically show up in the Finder—and vice-versa. Files in the library will still 
show up in
your application’s Open Recent menus, and Preview will still remember which page of the PDF you were
reading. In short, you can capture, organize, and search your files using EagleFiler, without 
giving up the
normal conveniences of the Mac experience.

1.5  Reliable Data Storage

The library may look like just a folder full of files, but EagleFiler uses a Core Data² SQL 
database (with an
automatic XML backup) to keep track of the files and their metadata. This lets you put thousands of 
files
in the library and access them reliably and quickly. Each time you open a library, EagleFiler 
checks to make
sure that all the files are present. It can even verify the library (using MD5 checksums³) to make 
sure that
none of the files has been corrupted. It’s like a poor man’s ZFS⁴. There’s no point in storing and 
backing

¹http://www.cocoatech.com
²http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Core Data
³http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Md5#Applications
⁴http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/ZFS

11


up damaged files. When you archive your documents in EagleFiler, you can be sure that when you need 
to
read them again they’ll be in pristine condition.

Plus, EagleFiler libraries go great with backups and archival. Your data is stored in individual 
files, so smart
backup and synchronization programs won’t waste time and space copying the documents that haven’t
changed. Since the files are in standard formats like PDF, RTF, and mbox, you’ll be able to read 
them years
from now, even if—alas—you’re no longer using EagleFiler.

1.6  Add Tags and Notes

Tags

You can assign tags to each record in EagleFiler. Tags are keywords that also have an associated 
abbreviation
symbol (optional) and color. For example, the “unread” tag is abbreviated by default with a blue 
circle.
Each record can have as many tags as you want. EagleFiler has some tags such as “unread,” “flagged,”
and “replied” built-in, and it will import these from Mail. If you’ve created additional tags in 
Mail using
MailTags, EagleFiler will import those as well. You can also create your own tags in EagleFiler.

Tags are shown in the tags bar in the record viewer, in the records list, in the Info inspector, in 
the Tags
inspector and in the Tag Cloud inspector. Each tag also appears as a source, which acts like a 
playlist in
iTunes or an album in Photos, in the browser window.

12


If you import a file that already has tags assigned from the Finder, the tags are brought with it 
into EagleFiler.
Tags also automatically sync between EagleFiler and Finder, so you can add or remove them in one app
and have the changes show up in the other. EagleFiler’s tag storage is more robust than Finder’s, 
and if
EagleFiler notices that a file’s tags have been stripped (e.g. because it was copied improperly), 
EagleFiler
will restore them.

Notes

Each record in EagleFiler can optionally have notes associated with it. Use notes to write down 
information
that goes with your documents, to excerpt key passages, to add your own comments or analysis, or to 
add
links to related records in EagleFiler. Notes are shown in the Info inspector and optionally as a 
column in
the records list.

13


Although, notes may look similar to Finder comments, they are different. Notes can be any size, and 
they
support rich text (multiple fonts, styles, and sizes), clickable links, embedded graphics, attached 
files, lists,
and tables, whereas Finder comments are limited to a small number of plain text characters. 
EagleFiler also
supports notes on records that are not stored as individual files, such as e-mail messages within a 
mailbox.
Because Finder comments cannot support all the features of EagleFiler notes, EagleFiler does not 
attempt
to  sync them. However, when you import a file that has Finder comments, EagleFiler will optionally 
import
them as an EagleFiler note.

Finder comments are fragile and may not be preserved when moving, copying, or backing up a file, 
and they
are not generally accessible from other applications. EagleFiler notes are stored as regular 
RTF/RTFD files
in the Finder, so they can be opened in other applications such as TextEdit and backed up. Notes 
files are
searchable via Spotlight and contain links back to the files that they’re attached to. EagleFiler 
also protects

14


the data integrity of notes using checksums, just as it does for the records themselves.

EagleFiler automatically adds the “note” tag to records that have notes, and removes it from ones 
that
don’t.

1.7  Speed Up and Simplify Your Other Applications

Most e-mail programs are designed for communicating with your mail server and letting you read and 
write
messages—not for storing all your old mail. By cleaning out your mail program’s database, you can 
remove
some clutter from its mailbox list and speed it up. EagleFiler preserves the entire message source, 
including
headers and attachments, as well as MailTags. But cleaning it out doesn’t have to mean lots of time 
wasted
trying to predict which messages you might need in the future. Disk space is plentiful—just archive 
all your
old mail into EagleFiler. Later, you’ll be able to find what you need with a quick search. 
Meanwhile, the
archived messages will no longer be slowing down Spotlight searches of your files and current 
messages. Nor
will they slow down and fill up your Time Machine backups.

Likewise, your Web browser’s bookmarks feature is great for remembering sites that you’ll want to 
go back
to frequently. But it isn’t ideal for remembering the information found on Web pages. Don’t 
bookmark news
articles, recipes, reviews, and other documents—and then try to look through your overflowing 
bookmarks
folder to recall the articles by title and URL. Instead, capture the Web pages into EagleFiler 
where you’ll
be able to search their entire contents.

1.8  Multiple Libraries

Some people like to dump all their information into a single EagleFiler library, with minimal 
folder structure,
and locate documents that they need using the search feature. But EagleFiler also supports multiple 
libraries,
for those who like to separate their business and personal files, group them by project or client, 
or keep
different kinds of files in different places. For example, you might keep some of your files on 
your iPhone
or  USB keychain drive, some in an encrypted library, and others in your Documents folder. Unlike 
with
iTunes, you can have multiple EagleFiler libraries open at once. Each library can also have its own 
set of
tags, so that you always see tags that are relevant to the task at hand. However you want to group 
your
files, EagleFiler can accommodate.

1.9  Feature List

The following is a partial list of EagleFiler’s features, so that you can quickly see how it works 
and how it’s
unique:

General

• Easy to install: just drag and drop a single application file. There’s no need to install a 
database
engine, plug-ins, or script files to integrate with your other applications.

• Easy to use, with a familiar three-pane interface—lots of power, without lots of cluttered 
options.

• Makes efficient use of RAM and disk space.

• AppleScript support, for automation and integration with other applications.

15


Importing

• Can import any kind of file. EagleFiler has special support for displaying most common formats,
and it can use Quick Look to display the others.

• Just press a hotkey while in another application, and EagleFiler will intelligently import the Web
page, mailbox, or file that you’re currently viewing.

• Press the Quick entry hotkey to create a new file in EagleFiler from any application.

• Store Web pages in the following formats: bookmark, PDF, PDF (single page), plain text, rich
text, rich text with images, Web archive.

• Import from any application by printing and choosing Save PDF to EagleFiler or by saving a file
into EagleFiler’s To Import folder or directly into the library’s folder structure.

• Move or save new files directly into the library folder, and EagleFiler will auto-import them when
it does a Scan for New Files.

• Import Web pages using bookmarklets.

• Automatically import scans by setting your scanner software (Fujitsu ScanSnap⁵ recommended)
to save its files in the To Import folder.

• There are many other ways to import (e.g. drag and drop, services) so you can choose whatever’s
easiest for the task at hand. Hold down the Option key when importing, and you can choose
where to save the file and add tags, notes, attached files, and other metadata.

• Automatically detects duplicate files to save disk space and help you see what’s already been
imported.

• Import from Evernote and convert its proprietary format to macOS’s standard rich text format
that works with many applications.


Mail

• First-class support for archiving e-mail. EagleFiler understands the content of messages and 
treats
them as mail rather than as text or RTF files.

• Import the selected mailboxes or messages simply by pressing a hotkey in Apple Mail, Entourage,
Mailsmith, Outlook, or PowerMail.

• EagleFiler retains the full message data, including attachments, read/flagged/replied status, and
MailTags, so nothing is lost when moving mail into EagleFiler.

• Speed up your mail program by moving older messages to EagleFiler.

• Messages are converted from proprietary formats and efficiently stored using the standard “mbox”
format and can be imported back into any mail program if desired.

• You can also store messages as individual .eml files, for Spotlight searchability, and you can 
freely
convert between the .eml and mbox formats.

• Can display messages as plain text (with colored quote levels and clickable links) or as HTML.

• Extract and convert your e-mail from Microsoft Outlook (or another proprietary mail client for-
mat) into standard mbox or .eml files.

• Remove duplicate e-mail messages.

Organization

• EagleFiler supports multiple libraries, stored wherever you want (hard disk, Dropbox, iPhone,
iPad, iPod, USB drive, etc.).

⁵http://www.fujitsu.com/us/services/computing/peripherals/scanners/scansnap/scansnap-iX500.html

16


• You can open more than one library at a time, and more than one window per library.

• Files can be organized with folders and tags, both of which can be nested.

• Use the Go menu to quickly jump around to viewing different parts of your library.

• Select a record, choose Copy Record Link, and paste the link into another application; click it to
open the record in EagleFiler.


Editing

• Create a new file with a single button or keypress and immediately begin typing. There’s no need
to open a new window or go through a Save dialog box.

• Use stationery (a.k.a. templates) to quickly create any type of new file. Stationery can automat-
ically trigger AppleScripts to dynamically fill in the metadata for you.

• RTF, text, OpenDocument, and bookmark files can be edited from within EagleFiler. Powerful
text editing features include find & replace, spelling and grammar checking, smart 
links/quotes/dashes,
data detectors, automatic text replacement, and case transformations.

• For other types of files (e.g. Word, Pages), just double-click to open them in your favorite 
editor.
The changes are automatically saved back into the EagleFiler library.

Storage

• Your data and notes are stored in regular files using standard formats (RTF, PDF, Web archive,
mbox, etc.), so there’s no lock-in or risk of database corruption, and it plays well with Time
Machine⁶.

• Uses MD5 checksums to verify the integrity of all files in the library, for safe long-term 
archival.

• Metadata (tags, titles, source URLs, etc.) goes into a Core Data⁷ SQL database for reliable
storage and quick access.

• EagleFiler automatically backs up the metadata and notes to XML property list files. In the rare
event that the database file becomes damaged, you can import the files into a new library, and
EagleFiler will build a new database and reconstruct all the metadata.

• Tags are automatically synced with Finder tags and copied to OpenMeta⁸ and the Spotlight
comments field to make them searchable and accessible to other applications.

Encryption

• Libraries can be encrypted with AES-128 or AES-256⁹ for secure, password-protected storage.

• Encrypted libraries are stored using Apple’s disk image technology, so their contents are 
accessible
on any Mac, whether or not EagleFiler is installed.

• The entire library contents—including the metadata, indexes, and temporary files—are encrypted.
Unencrypted data never touches the disk.

• In other respects, an encrypted library works just like a regular one. It’s still fully 
searchable,
and the files are still accessible to other applications (once you’ve entered the passphrase).

• Unlike with FileVault, the contents of an encrypted EagleFiler library are protected from anyone
who doesn’t know the passphrase, including other users on the same Mac.

Search

⁶http://www.apple.com/osx/apps/#timemachine
⁷http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Core Data
⁸http://openmetainfo.org

⁹http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Advanced Encryption Standard#Security of AES

17


• EagleFiler uses its own optimized indexes so that you can search the contents of your library
faster than with Spotlight. Because EagleFiler doesn’t rely on Spotlight, you can search folders
and volumes that are excluded from Spotlight, and you can still search even while your whole
drive’s index is being rebuilt after restoring from a backup.

• You can do exact searches across individual fields (title, filename, notes, tags, from, any 
recipient)
as well as searches across the entire file contents, including e-mail attachments.

• Searches can use phrases, wildcards, Boolean AND/OR/NOT, and grouping.

• Do quick tag searches by selecting one or more tags at once.

• Create your own smart folders and organize them into folders. Custom smart folders can contain
an unlimited number of criteria, optionally using nested Any/All/None. You can define actions
to occur when you create a new record in smart folder, or drag one there.

• Matching search terms are highlighted in the document contents and in the records list. Use
the Find panel or its keyboard shortcuts to search within a document and to jump from one
highlighted occurrence to the next.

• EagleFiler reads most files itself, so it can index text that Spotlight wouldn’t see (e.g. files 
attached
to e-mail messages, invisible Web content, PDF annotations, Skim¹⁰ notes attached to PDF files).
It automatically takes advantage of third-party Spotlight importer plug-ins to support custom file
formats.

• Since the files and notes are stored out in the open, they’re also searchable with Spotlight
(for when you want to search your entire Mac at once), without the need for stub files in the
Caches/Metadata folder.

• EagleFiler’s search indexes are immediately available after syncing, restoring from a backup, or
transferring your files to a new Mac; there’s no need to wait for it to reindex, as with Spotlight.

Metadata

• For each file, EagleFiler records the document title, author/from, and source URL.

• You can assign tags (a.k.a. keywords). Tags can have abbreviation symbols and colors, and
they can be nested. Quickly assign tags by typing (with auto-completion), drag-and-drop, or by
clicking on them in the Tag Cloud.

• The Tags column in the records list compactly shows the abbreviation symbols for all the assigned
tags.

• Each file or mail message can have notes, which can include rich text, clickable links, images, 
and
tables.

• Each file and folder can have a colored label, which also shows up in the Finder.

• You can copy links to EagleFiler records and paste them into notes or RTF files, or into other
applications.

• When importing via the capture key, EagleFiler can preserve metadata (e.g. tags, notes, titles,
URLs) from the source application. This is often higher fidelity than using that application’s own
export feature.

• When importing an existing file, EagleFiler can import tags and notes from the file’s Spotlight
comments.

• EagleFiler can display and search Skim¹¹ notes attached to PDF files.

¹⁰http://skim-app.sourceforge.net
¹¹http://skim-app.sourceforge.net

18


2  Installing and Updating

2.1  Requirements

EagleFiler requires macOS 10.9 or later. For older versions of macOS, previous versions of 
EagleFiler are
available.

2.2  Installing EagleFiler

1. Drag the EagleFiler icon onto the Applications folder.

2. Double-click the Applications folder to open it.

3. Double-click the EagleFiler icon to launch it.

4. Eject the EagleFiler-1.9.9 icon.

Permission to Import From Other Apps

To enable certain EagleFiler importing features, please see the Security & Privacy Access section 
of the
manual.

System Services

Please see Enabling EagleFiler’s Services in the Services section of the manual.

PDF Service

Please see Installing the PDF Service in the Save PDF to EagleFiler section of the manual.

If macOS Won’t Launch the App

When you double-click the application file to launch it, macOS may erroneously report:

• “‘EagleFiler’ is damaged and can’t be opened. You should move it to the Trash.”

• “‘EagleFiler’ cannot be opened because the developer cannot be verified. macOS cannot verify that
this app is free from malware.”

The app is unlikely to be damaged because the EagleFiler-1.9.9.dmg file opened and mounted without
error. The EagleFiler application file is signed with a Developer ID certificate and notarized by 
Apple.
If desired, you can manually verify this, which will also check that the app is not damaged.  
Instead,
what seems to be happening is that macOS is getting confused by some metadata that was added to the
EagleFiler-1.9.9.dmg file when your Web browser downloaded it. Either the metadata is incorrect, or
macOS is encountering an error when verifying it (perhaps due to a temporary problem with Apple’s 
servers).

You can work around the problem by downloading the app in a different way (which avoids the 
metadata).
First, open the Terminal app in the Utilities folder in your Applications folder. Then enter this 
command
(all on line line) and press Return.

cd ~/Downloads/ && curl -LO ’https://c-command.com/downloads/EagleFiler-current.dmg’

19


2.3  Updating From a Previous Version

There are two ways to update to the latest version of EagleFiler:

Automatic Updating

1. Launch your old version of EagleFiler.

2. Normally, EagleFiler will automatically check for updates and detect that a new version is avail-
able. If you have turned that feature off or don’t want to wait for the automatic check:

a) Choose Software Update... from the EagleFiler menu.

b) Click the Check Now button.

3. Click the Download & Install button and follow the on-screen instructions.

4. You may be asked for an administrator password to ensure that incorrect file permissions on your
Mac do not prevent the update from completing, leaving your Mac in an inconsistent state. The
username and password for the automatic update are the ones for installers and logging into your
Mac. They’re not related to EagleFiler. If you don’t know your password, you can reset it or
update EagleFiler by following the “Manual Updating” instructions below.

Manual Updating

1. Go to the EagleFiler Web site and click the Download (Free Trial) button.

2. Quit EagleFiler.

3. Replace the old EagleFiler application file with the new one. That is, if EagleFiler is 
installed in
the Applications folder, drag the new EagleFiler application icon into the Applications folder
and click Replace when the Finder asks if you want to overwrite the old version.

Note: If you get an error saying that the file is locked or you do not have sufficient privileges, 
drag
the old EagleFiler to the trash and empty it, and then drag the new one into the Applications
folder.

4. Launch EagleFiler.

Mac App Store

If you purchased via the Mac App Store, you should update EagleFiler using the App Store 
application.

2.4  Reinstalling a Fresh Copy

If your copy of EagleFiler is damaged, you may need to download and install a fresh copy.

• If you are able to launch EagleFiler, you can ask it to reinstall itself. To do this, follow the 
Automatic
Updating instructions (in the Updating From a Previous Version section) but hold down the Option
key  when you click the Check Now button.

20


• If EagleFiler won’t launch, follow the Manual Updating instructions in the Updating From a 
Previous
Version section.

• If you’ve uninstalled EagleFiler, you can always get it back by going to the EagleFiler Web site 
and
clicking the Download (Free Trial) button. After installing it, you can enter your Serial Name
and Serial Number into the Purchase. . . window to take it out of trial mode. If you can’t find your
serial number, you can look it up online.

Mac App Store

If you purchased via the Mac App Store, to reinstall you can:

1. Quit EagleFiler and drag it to the trash.

2. Empty the trash.

3. Go to the App Store application and download EagleFiler again. (You won’t have to pay again).

2.5  Uninstalling EagleFiler

Please Contact Us

If you are considering uninstalling EagleFiler because you’re having trouble using it or it doesn’t 
seem to
meet your needs, please contact us at eaglefiler@c-command.com¹². We’re happy to help get you up and
running and always looking for suggestions for how to improve EagleFiler.

Removing EagleFiler’s Application Files

To completely uninstall EagleFiler, delete:

• The EagleFiler application file in your Applications folder.

• The PDF Services file:

/Users/<username>/Library/PDF Services/Save PDF to EagleFiler

(See How can I open the Library folder?.)

Although you will no longer be able to open your libraries with EagleFiler, the files in the 
libraries will
remain accessible in the Finder. Next to each library is a folder called Files (which contains the 
files and
folders in the library) and a folder called Notes (which contains any notes that you’ve added).

2.6  Security & Privacy Access

On macOS 10.14 and later, you need to tell the system if you want applications to be able to 
control other
applications or access their data. For example:

¹²mailto:eaglefiler@c-command.com

21


• In order for the capture key to work with Apple Mail, EagleFiler needs to be able to control Mail 
to
ask it which messages you’ve selected.

• In order to use the capture key with Safari, EagleFiler needs to be able to control Safari to ask 
it which
Web site it’s currently showing.

• In order for EagleFiler to be able to read or copy the Spotlight comments when importing a file, 
it
needs to be able to control the Finder.

• In order for EagleFiler to be able to import Mail or Messages data, you need to give it full disk 
access
so that it can read those applications’ data.

2.6.1 Granting Full Disk Access

As discussed in the Security & Privacy Access section, EagleFiler needs Full Disk Access in order 
to fully
function.

To Grant Full Disk Access on macOS 13 Ventura

1. Go to System Settings ▷ Privacy & Security ▷ Full Disk Access. (You can also click here
to go directly to Full Disk Access.)

22


2. Click the + button indicated by the red arrow and choose EagleFiler from your Applications

folder. Click Quit & Reopen if applicable. EagleFiler should now appear in the list as checked.

3. Double-click the EagleFiler icon to relaunch it if it is not already open.

To Grant Full Disk Access on macOS 10.14 Through macOS 12

1. Go to the Security & Privacy pane of System Preferences and click on the Privacy tab. Then
scroll down and click on Full Disk Access. (You can also click here to go directly to Full Disk
Access.)

23


2. If the lock button in the lower left corner of the window is locked, click on it, enter your 
Mac’s
login password, and click Unlock so that you are allowed to make changes.

3. Click the + button and choose EagleFiler from your Applications folder. Click Quit Now if
applicable. EagleFiler should now appear in the list as checked.

4. Double-click the EagleFiler icon to relaunch it.

Troubleshooting Full Disk Access

In rare cases, EagleFiler may not appear in the Full Disk Access list after you add it. You can 
enter this
command in Terminal:

tccutil reset SystemPolicyAllFiles

to reset the system’s database of Full Disk Access privileges and then try adding EagleFiler again.
If you still aren’t able to add EagleFiler, see the Troubleshooting Privacy Access section.

24


2.6.2 Granting Automation Access

As discussed in the Security & Privacy Access section, EagleFiler needs Automation access in order 
to fully
function.

macOS will automatically ask you when EagleFiler needs to be able to control an application. It 
will show
an alert, and you should click the OK button.

If you accidentally click Don’t Allow and deny EagleFiler access to control an application, macOS 
will
remember this and may not ask you again. However, you can fix this by manually granting access.

To Grant Automation Access on macOS 13 Ventura

1. Go to System Settings ▷ Privacy & Security ▷ Automation. (You can also click here to
go directly to Automation.)

25


2. Click the switch(es) under EagleFiler.

To Grant Automation Access on macOS 10.14 Through macOS 12

1. Go to System Settings ▷ Security & Privacy ▷ Privacy ▷ Automation. (You can also
click here to go directly to Automation.)

26


2. Checking the box(es) under EagleFiler.

Troubleshooting Automation Access

It may help just to restart your Mac.

You can enter this command in Terminal:

tccutil reset AppleEvents

to reset the system’s database of Automation privileges. Then macOS will ask you again the next time
EagleFiler needs access, and you can click OK. If it still doesn’t ask you to grant access, it may 
help to
restart your Mac again or use the maintenance feature of Onyx.

If it still doesn’t work, see the Troubleshooting Privacy Access section.

27


2.6.3 Troubleshooting Privacy Access

If macOS doesn’t remember the Security & Privacy Access that you granted:

Try Resetting the TCC Service

Try the tccutil reset commands as described in Granting Full Disk Access or Granting Automation
Access.

Try Reinstalling the Application

Make sure that the application file is not damaged, e.g. by reinstalling a fresh copy. Also, make 
sure that
you are not modifying the application package, e.g. editing its Info.plist file to try to hide the 
Dock icon.

Try Resetting the Privacy Database

If it still doesn’t work, you may need to reset the entire privacy database:

1. First, we will temporarily turn off System Integrity Protection so that we have access to delete
the database. You may want to print these instructions or write them down so that you have
access to them while rebooting your Mac.

2. Restart your Mac in Recovery Mode. The steps for doing this depend on which type of processor
your Mac has:

• On an Intel-based Mac, click on the Apple menu and choose Restart  Hold down the

Command and R keys so that your Mac will reboot in Recovery Mode.

• On an Apple Silicon–based Mac, click on the Apple menu and choose Shut Down....
Press and hold the power button on your Mac until you see “Loading startup options.”
Click Options, then click Continue, then click Continue again.

3. From the Utilities menu, choose Terminal.

4. Type csrutil disable and press Return.

5. Click on the Apple menu and choose Restart. This is necessary for the SIP change to take effect.

6. Drag the file:

/Users/<username>/Library/Application Support/com.apple.TCC/TCC.db

to the trash. (See How can I open the Library folder? if you have trouble finding it.)

7. You can then repeat Steps 2–5, typing csrutil enable instead, in order to turn SIP back on.

Try Reinstalling macOS

If it still doesn’t work, reinstalling macOS takes a while but always seems to fix the problem.

28


3  Using EagleFiler

3.1  Basics

Welcome to EagleFiler. Like the Photos app, EagleFiler stores its files in a library. To get 
started, choose
New Library. . . from the File menu. You can save the library wherever you want, and you can create
multiple libraries if desired. To add to your EagleFiler library, you can:

Import existing files or Web pages

The easiest way to import is often to press the capture key or the capture with options key. 
EagleFiler
will automatically figure out the current Web page or the selected mail messages and import them.
There are also many other ways to import.

While EagleFiler is importing, it will show a green arrow in the Dock icon and a spinning progress
indicator in the library’s browser window. To ensure a correct import, do not modify or delete the 
files
being imported until you can see that EagleFiler has finished. Generally speaking, when you import
an existing file, it’s copied into the EagleFiler library. When it’s done, you can delete the 
original if
desired.

Create new files using EagleFiler

In EagleFiler’s File menu, the New Record ▷ Rich Text File and New Record ▷ Plain Text File
commands let you create new, empty files. The Quick entry hotkey lets you create new files from
within any application.

You can also add your own stationery commands to the New Record submenu. This lets you create
other types of files (e.g. Word or Pages documents) and create new files from templates. To do this,
choose New Record ▷ Open Stationery Folder and copy your template files into this folder.

The contents of your libraries are stored in library folders. The files are visible in the Finder, 
and you can
view and edit them via other applications. However, the files are managed by EagleFiler, so you 
should only
move, rename, or delete them from within EagleFiler.

Each library that’s open in EagleFiler is displayed in one or more browser windows. Each browser 
window
contains a source list, which lets you access the library’s records. The record is the basic unit 
of information in
EagleFiler. Files, folders, and mail messages are all records. Each record has contents that can be 
displayed
(and perhaps edited) in the record viewer. You can search for records and annotate them with tags 
and
notes, which can include attached files.

3.2  Library Folders

Outside of EagleFiler, for example when you are browsing in the Finder, each EagleFiler library 
appears as
a library folder with the following structure:

29


To find your library’s folder, see Where is my EagleFiler library?.

Structure of a Library Folder

• The .eflibrary file is the way that you open the library in EagleFiler. It also holds various 
information
about the contents of the library, such as indexes that EagleFiler uses for searching, as well as 
tags
and other metadata that you’ve added.

• The Files folder contains all the files and folders that have been imported into the library. The 
folder
hierarchy within the Files folder matches that within EagleFiler, so you can easily browse and 
search
the contents of your library from outside of EagleFiler.

• The Notes folder contains one RTF file for each record that has a note. You can edit a record’s 
notes
using the Info inspector. The notes are searchable within EagleFiler and also from Spotlight.

• One way to import files into the library is to move or save them into To Import folder.

• If a file in the To Import folder cannot be imported, EagleFiler moves it to the Unable to Import
folder. It is safe to delete files in this folder at any time, if you don’t want to keep them. If 
there have
not been any such errors, this folder will not exist.

• The Smart Folders folder contains a .plist file for each smart folder in the library. You can 
copy a
smart folder from one library to another by copying the associated .plist file. (Make sure that the
libraries aren’t open in EagleFiler when you do this.)

30


Rules for Library Folders

The contents of the library folder are managed by EagleFiler. What this means is that the files and 
folders
are fully accessible to other applications, but there are some limits to the kinds of changes you 
can make to
the library from outside of EagleFiler. These restrictions ensure that the contents of the library 
folder stay
in sync with the .eflibrary, so that EagleFiler knows where all the files are.

You can:

• view and search the contents of the library folder using the Finder, Spotlight, and other 
applications.

• open files using other applications.

• edit files using other applications and save your changes (without changing the filename).

• add files to the To Import folder.

• add files and folders to the Files folder; EagleFiler will detect them when it does a Scan for 
New Files.

• change the Finder tags, label, Spotlight comments, and extended attributes of files in the 
library folder.

• edit folder and file icons using the Finder’s Get Info window.

• store the library folder on a shared volume.

So long as you don’t do it while the library is open in EagleFiler, you can:

• move or rename the library folder in the Finder.

• rename the .eflibrary file in the Finder.

• backup and restore the entire library folder.

You should not:

• open the library in more than one copy of EagleFiler at a time.

• move, rename, or delete files inside the Files or Notes folders.

• modify the .eflibrary file.

• move or rename the library folder’s ancestor folders while the library is open in EagleFiler.

• edit the contents of mailbox files.

• store a library inside another library’s folder.

Recovering a Library

If you inadvertently break the above rules (i.e. move, rename, or delete files from outside of 
EagleFiler),
EagleFiler will notice this when it verifies your library and report some errors. See the 
instructions in the
Verify section of the manual for how to respond to the errors and repair the library. If the 
changes are
difficult to undo, you can instead rebuild the library.

31


Moving a Library

To move a library, first close it in EagleFiler. Then you can use the Finder to move the entire 
library folder
to the new location.

Renaming a Library

To rename a library, first close it in EagleFiler. Then you can use the Finder to rename the 
library folder,
the .eflibrary file, and the To Import folder to have the new name.

Deleting a Library

If you no longer wish to use one of your libraries, first close it in EagleFiler. Then you can drag 
the entire
library folder in the Finder to the trash in the Dock. This will delete all of the files, as well 
as EagleFiler’s
metadata. To delete an encrypted library, drag the .sparsebundle or .sparseimage file to the trash.

Syncing a Library Locally

It’s fine to use software that copies folders quickly by only copying the files that have changed. 
An example
of this is SuperDuper’s¹³ Smart Update feature. Such software works great with EagleFiler because 
it copies
data in only one direction at a time. You end up with the same result as if you’d done a regular 
copy, but
it doesn’t take as long. If you use ChronoSync, be sure that Don’t create empty folders and Ignore
invisibles are unchecked.

You should not use software that synchronizes or merges by copying data in both directions at once. 
This is
equivalent to adding/moving/renaming/deleting files, which would violate the above rules, so it 
would cause
the Files and Notes folders to get out of sync with the .eflibrary file.

Sharing a Library

Please see the “Rules for Shared Libraries” in the How can I access my library from multiple Macs? 
section.

Aliases and Symlinks

You can replace the Files folder with an alias or symlink in order to store the files in your 
library separately
from EagleFiler’s metadata. For example, you might want to store the raw files in Dropbox but not 
waste
space and bandwidth uploading EagleFiler’s index and temporary files. To do this:

1. Close the library in EagleFiler.

2. Move the library folder to where you want to store EagleFiler’s files.

3. Move the Files folder to where you want to store the raw files.

4. Make an alias or symlink from the Files folder to its former location next to the .eflibrary

file. Make sure that the alias or symlink is called Files.

You can also replace a subfolder of the Files folder with a symlink in order to store only that 
subfolder on
Dropbox. For example, if the subfolder is called EagleFilerDropbox and your EagleFiler library is 
on the
desktop and called EagleFilerLibrary:

¹³http://www.shirt-pocket.com/SuperDuper/SuperDuperDescription.html

32


1. In EagleFiler, create an empty folder called EagleFilerDropbox.

2. Close the library in EagleFiler.

3. In the Finder, move EagleFilerDropbox from the Files folder to your Dropbox folder.

4. In Terminal, enter the command:

ln -s ~/Dropbox/EagleFilerDropbox ~/Desktop/EagleFilerLibrary/Files/EagleFilerDropbox

3.3  What Can Be Imported

EagleFiler can import virtually any file on your Mac, as well as Web pages that are displayed in 
your
browser and e-mail messages that are displayed in your mail program. EagleFiler has specialized 
importing
and viewing support for the following types of files:

• Adobe Illustrator documents.

• AudioNote¹⁴ documents.

• Bean¹⁵ documents.

• Bookmark (.webloc and .url) files and bookmarks dragged from Safari¹⁶ and OmniWeb¹⁷.

• Chat transcripts from Messages¹⁸ and iChat (see Importing iMessages).

• Dragged text from other applications. In some cases, EagleFiler will be able to import more 
information
if you drag the text onto one of its windows rather than its Dock icon. For example, when dragging
text from Safari, EagleFiler will be able to store URL that goes with the text.

• ENEX files exported from Evernote.

• Folders. EagleFiler imports the contents of the folder (and any subfolders, preserving the 
hierarchy).

• HTML files.

• iCalendar (.ics) files.

• Images (including animated GIFs).

• Keynote presentations. (For best results, set Keynote to Include preview in document.)

• Mailboxes in mbox format, Apple Mail mailboxes (attachments included), and Apple Mail archive
mailboxes. The Importing Mail section explains the recommended ways to import mail messages from
each e-mail program.

• Mail messages, stored as .eml files.

• Microsoft Word files (.docx and .doc).

• Movies.

¹⁴http://luminantsoftware.com
¹⁵http://www.bean-osx.com

¹⁶http://www.apple.com/osx/whats-new/features.html#safari
¹⁷http://www.omnigroup.com/applications/omniweb/
¹⁸http://www.apple.com/osx/apps/#messages

33


• Numbers spreadsheets. (For best results, set Numbers to Include preview in document.)

• OpenDocument Text files.

• Pages documents. (For best results, set Pages to Include preview in document.)

• PDF files. EagleFiler also understands PDFD bundles created by Skim¹⁹ and can display and index
Skim notes that are attached to PDF or PDFD files.

• PostScript and EPS files.

• Property list files (XML and binary).

• Rich Text (RTF and RTFD) files.

• RSS mailbox folders from Apple Mail.

• Sounds and music.

• Text files (encoded with ASCII or UTF-8, or with a byte-order-mark) and text clippings. EagleFiler
looks at a file’s contents to determine whether it looks like a text file and also excludes certain 
files
based on their extension. You can use Terminal to force certain file types to never be treated as 
text
files, for example:

defaults write com.c-command.EagleFiler NonTextExtensions -array oo3 skp t2d

This change will take effect for future imports or if you rebuild the library.

• URLs, which will be downloaded and converted to Web archives.

• vCard (.vcf) files from Contacts.

• Web archives.

Documents that aren’t of any of the above types can also be imported into EagleFiler. EagleFiler 
can preview
their contents using Quick Look, and it uses Spotlight’s importers to index them for searching. You 
can use
the Open With External Viewer command to open the documents in other applications.

When importing files, EagleFiler automatically imports tags from the Spotlight comments and extended
attributes.

3.4  Ways to Import

Many ways to get your files and data into EagleFiler are described in the sections below. If you’ve 
just
installed EagleFiler, make sure that you enable the system service (for importing selected text) 
and the
PDF service (for printing to EagleFiler). There’s also more information in the Importing Mail, 
Import
Bookmarks..., Import from iPhone Camera, and Import ENEX File. . . sections.

Capturing

Usually, the easiest way to import from another application is to press the capture key or the 
capture with
options key. EagleFiler will automatically determine what you have selected or what you’re viewing 
in the
current application, and it will import it into the library. For example, if you’re looking at a 
Web page in

¹⁹http://skim-app.sourceforge.net

34


Safari, you can press the capture key to import it as a Web archive. Press the capture with options 
key if you
want to import it and, at the same time, assign tags or choose which folder it will go into. The 
Applications
That Support Capture section describes which applications you can capture from and what will be 
imported.

Asking for Options

Normally, EagleFiler imports into the top level of the library (Unfiled) and assigns the “unread” 
tag. In
general (with any of the import methods below), you can hold down the Option key when importing to 
have
EagleFiler show you the options window. From there, you can choose which folder to import into, and 
you
can change the tags, label, notes, and other metadata right at the time of import.

Multiple Libraries

If more than one library is open (and you didn’t drag into a specific library’s window), EagleFiler 
assumes
that you meant to import into the current library (the one with the frontmost window). If no 
library is open,
EagleFiler will show a dialog asking you to open one; then you can click the Import button to 
import the
files  into that library.

3.4.1 Applications That Support Capture

EagleFiler’s capture feature lets you import the current window or items from the frontmost 
application,
just by pressing a key. The capture key and capture with options key work in these applications:

Contacts

Captures a vCard file for the selected contacts.

BBEdit

Captures the file of the first document of the front window.

Brave Browser

Captures the URL of the current tab.

Camino

Captures the URL of the current tab of the front window.

Cocoalicious

Captures the URLs of the selected posts, preserving the tags, description, and extended 
description.

Cruz

Captures the URL of the current tab.

Cyndicate

Captures the URLs of the selected articles, preserving the label and flagged status.

DEVONagent

Captures the URL of the front browser window.

DEVONthink

Captures the selected items, preserving the comments, tags, rating, URL, and flagged/unread/locked
state for the specific items that are selected. If a folder is selected, the files and subfolders 
it contains
will be imported, but they will not retain this extra metadata.

35


Endo

Captures the selected news items as Web archives, preserving their tags and importing the excerpts 
as
notes.

Evernote

Captures the selected notes and converts them to RTFD format, along with their tags, attachments,
source URLs, and other metadata. You can also use the Import ENEX File. . . command to import
notes previously exported from Evernote. (Evernote 10 no longer supports AppleScript, so you should
use the Import ENEX File. . . command instead of the capture key.)

Finder

Captures the selected files in the front window.

Firefox

Firefox is no longer scriptable enough to support the capture key, but pressing it will show you 
some
instructions for importing from Firefox to EagleFiler.

Flock

Captures the URL of the current tab.

Google Chrome

Captures the URL of the current tab. You can also use EagleFiler’s service or the Auto Copy 
extension
to import the selected text.

Hibari

Captures the URL of the selected tweet. (Direct messages are not supported.)

iCab

Captures the URL of the front window.


Iron

Captures the URL of the current tab. You can also use EagleFiler’s service or the Auto Copy 
extension
to import the selected text.

Journler

Captures the selected documents, preserving the tags, category, comments, and label.

Keep It

Captures the selected files, preserving the tags, comments, labels, favorite status, and source URL.
(Notes remain in Keep It’s proprietary format.)

Keynote

Captures the file of the front window.


Leaf

Leaf is not scriptable enough to support the capture key, but you can enable the EagleFiler Import

extension in its Sharing preferences.


Mail

Captures the selected messages in the front viewer window. Tags, projects, and annotations from
MailTags are preserved, as are the unread/flagged/replied/etc. flags from Mail itself.

36


MailMate

Please see Importing Mail From MailMate.

Mailsmith

Captures the selected messages or mailboxes, preserving the message status, label, and notes. You
may find it helpful to use Email Archiver²⁰ to separate messages by age before importing them into
EagleFiler.

MarsEdit

Captures the text of current post window or the selected posts, preserving the permalink and the
published date.

Microsoft Edge

Captures the URL of the current tab.

Microsoft Entourage

Captures the selected messages or mailbox, preserving the message flags, categories, and projects. 
If
you want EagleFiler to skip a message, you can assign it the category “OmitFromArchive”.

Microsoft Excel (2004 and later)

Captures the file of the front window (make sure that it’s saved to disk).

Microsoft OneNote

Unfortunately, the Mac version of OneNote does not make it easy to get your data out. You can either
export one page at a time as a PDF or sync your data to a Windows PC and then use it to export
everything at once.

Microsoft Outlook

Captures the selected messages or mailbox, preserving the message flags, read status, and 
categories.
If you want EagleFiler to skip a message, you can assign it the category “OmitFromArchive”.

Microsoft PowerPoint (2016 and later)

Captures the file of the front window.

Microsoft Word (2004 and later)

Captures the file of the front window (make sure that it’s saved to disk).

MindManager

Captures the file of the front window.

News

Apple News doesn’t support the capture key, but you can import to EagleFiler using the Share 
button.

News Explorer

News Explorer is not scriptable enough to support the capture key, but you can enable the EagleFiler
Import service in its Sharing preferences and assign a keyboard shortcut to it.

Netflix Freak

Captures the URLs of the selected movies.

²⁰http://www.garrison.com.au/freeware/emailarchiver.html

37


NetNewsWire

Captures the URL of the current tab, or the URL of the selected headline (if no tab is selected). If
text is selected in a Web page, EagleFiler adds it as a note. If it’s starred, applies the flagged 
tag.
You can also use the EagleFiler Import command from NetNewsWire’s Share button. (Capturing
works in NetNewsWire 5 and NetNewsWire 3, but not in NetNewsWire 4.)

NewsRack

Captures the URL of the current tab and puts the selected text in a note.

Nisus Writer Express

Captures the file of the front window.

Notes

The Apple Notes application is not scriptable enough to support the capture key, but pressing it 
will
show you some instructions for importing from Notes to EagleFiler. For example, you can select text
in Notes and import it using one of EagleFiler’s Services.

Numbers

Captures the file of the front window.

OmniGraffle

Captures the file of the front window. For best results, set OmniGraffle to save its documents with 
a
Quick Look preview.

OmniWeb

Captures the URL of the current tab.

Opera

Captures the URL of the current tab.

Orion

Captures the URL of the current tab.

Pages

Captures the file of the front window.

Path Finder

Captures the selected files in the front window.

PDFView

Captures the file of the front window.

PowerMail

Captures the selected messages or mailboxes, preserving the message status and label

Preview

Captures the frontmost document.

Pukka

Captures URL being added, along with the title, tags, and description.

38


Reeder

Reeder is not scriptable enough to support the capture key, but pressing it will show you some 
instruc-
tions for setting up a toolbar button or a separate hotkey for importing to EagleFiler.

Safari and Safari Technology Preview

Captures the URL of the current tab and puts the selected text in a note. On macOS 10.11.5 and 
later,
in order for EagleFiler to access the selected text you must check Show Develop menu in menu bar
in Safari’s Advanced settings and then make sure that Enable JavaScript From Apple Events
in the Develop menu is checked. Some Web pages (e.g. some sites that require logging in) cannot be
captured by loading the URL shown in Safari’s location bar. For more information, see Private Web
Pages in the Importing Web Pages and URLs section of the manual.

Skim

Captures the file of the front window.

SOHO Notes

SOHO Notes does not work with EagleFiler’s capture key, but you can import from it via drag and
drop. For example, dragging a folder of notes from the SOHO Notes window to EagleFiler’s Dock icon
will export those notes from SOHO Notes and import them into EagleFiler.

SubEthaEdit

Captures the file of the front window.

TextEdit

Captures the file of the front window.

TextMate

Captures the file of the front window.

TextWrangler

Captures the file of the first document of the front window.

Together

Captures the selected files, preserving the tags, comments, labels, and ratings.

Vesper

From Vesper on iOS, you can export to iCloud Drive. Then select the Vesper Export f folder in the
Mac Finder and press the capture key.

Vienna

Captures the URL of the last selected post.

Vivaldi

Captures the URL of the current tab.

WebKit Nightly

See description for Safari.

WebnoteHappy

Captures the selected URLs as Web archives, preserving the tags and notes.

39


Yojimbo

Captures the selected items, preserving the tags, labels, flagged state, and comments.

For applications that are not listed here, there are many other ways to import. For applications 
that support
AppleScript, you can add EagleFiler capture support by writing capture scripts.

3.4.2 Importing Existing Files

If your data is already saved as a file, there are several methods for moving or copying it into an 
EagleFiler
library:

Moving Files Into the Library

In the Finder, you can drag and drop to move files into the To Import folder or the Files folder.

Copying Files Into the Library

• Drag and drop onto the source list, records list, Drop Pad, or Dock icon. Hold down the Option key
to have EagleFiler show you the options window.

• Select files in another application and invoke one of EagleFiler’s Services via a menu or keyboard
shortcut. Hold down the Option key to have EagleFiler show you the options window.

• Choose Import Files. . . from the File menu.

• In the Finder, Option-drag to copy into the the To Import folder or the Files folder.

• Select the files in the Finder and press the capture key.

• Drag and drop files from one EagleFiler library window to another.

• Control-click on a file in the Finder and choose Open With ▷ EagleFiler. Hold down the Option

key to have EagleFiler show you the options window.

• Use the Share menu in any app, after enabling EagleFiler’s share extension.

• Run an AppleScript such as:

tell application "EagleFiler"

import files {POSIX file "/Users/mjt/Desktop/MyFile"}
end tell

On macOS 10.13, EagleFiler uses APFS’s cloning feature so that file copied into the library do not 
use any
additional disk space.

3.4.3  Importing Web Pages and URLs
Importing Whole Pages

• While in your Web browser, press a capture hotkey, as described in the Ways to Import section.

40


• While in your Web browser, click on one of the EagleFiler bookmarklets in the browser’s toolbar.

• Drag and drop URLs onto the source list, records list, Drop Pad, or Dock icon. Hold down the 
Option

key to have EagleFiler show you the options window.

• From any application’s Share menu or toolbar button, choose EagleFiler Import. Hold down the
Option key to have EagleFiler show you the options window. You can configure a keyboard shortcut
in System Settings.

• Choose Import URLs... from the File menu and enter the URL of the page.

• Choose Import Bookmarks... from the File menu to import all the pages in a bookmarks file (e.g.
exported from a browser).

• Select a URL in another application and invoke one of EagleFiler’s Services via a menu or keyboard
shortcut. Hold down the Option key to have EagleFiler show you the options window.

• Run an AppleScript such as:

tell application "EagleFiler"

import URLs {"http://www.apple.com", "http://c-command.com"}
end tell

The Web page format preference lets you choose whether EagleFiler saves URLs as Web archives, PDF 
files,
bookmarks, etc.

Importing Only Part of a Page

• While in your Web browser, select some or all of the page’s text and invoke one of EagleFiler’s 
Services
via the menu or keyboard shortcut. Hold down the Option key to have EagleFiler show you the
options window.

• Select some text in your Web browser and drag and drop it onto the source list, records list, 
Drop Pad,
or Dock icon. Hold down the Option key to have EagleFiler show you the options window.

Accessing the Source URL

When you’ve imported a Web page, you can see its URL:

• In the Info window in EagleFiler or (for PDFs) in Preview.

• By showing the Source URL column in the Source List.

• Using the Copy Source URL command in the Edit menu.

• In the tooltip if you hover the cursor over an item in the Records List.

The source URL can be edited via script.

Private Web Pages

Some Web pages, such as order confirmation pages or account information screens, can only be loaded 
when
you’re logged into the site. EagleFiler cannot share the login session with your browser, so if 
you’re logged
in  via Safari you would need to save the page using Safari. There are three ways to do this:

41


• Use the Save PDF to EagleFiler command.

• Choose File ▷ Save As in Safari and then choose the Web Archive format and save the file into
your library’s the To Import folder or the Files folder.

• Select some or all of the page’s text and invoke one of EagleFiler’s Services.

Similar techniques work in other Web browsers.

Videos

EagleFiler is designed to import Web pages and other directly downloadable URLs. To import streaming
video, we recommend these tools:

• Softorino YouTube Converter

• ClipConverter

• Downie

• SaveVideo²¹

Processing Web Pages

Before saving from a Web browser into the To Import folder or the Files folder, you can reformat 
the page
using a JavaScript bookmarklet such as Readability.

You can also set EagleFiler to automatically process every Web page that it downloads. For example, 
to
process every page using the discontinued²² Instapaper text processor, you could have entered this 
command
in Terminal:

defaults write com.c-command.EagleFiler WebToolURLProcessingPrefix 
’https://www.instapaper.com/text?u=’

To turn off processing, enter this command in Terminal:

defaults delete com.c-command.EagleFiler WebToolURLProcessingPrefix

Importing Without JavaScript

EagleFiler normally enables JavaScript when importing Web pages so that it archives the page as it 
would
be displayed in your browser. However, some sites use JavaScript in a way that makes the page 
content not
fully load if there is no user interaction. Others use it to display advertisements that can make 
your archived
pages much larger than their actual content. And sometimes JavaScript triggers an OS bug that makes 
the
import hang.

EagleFiler has an advanced setting that lets you disable JavaScript for certain domains where you 
find it to
be a problem. To set the non-JavaScript domains, enter a command like this in Terminal:

²¹http://savevideo.me
²²http://blog.instapaper.com/post/130272576931

42


defaults write com.c-command.EagleFiler WebToolNonJavaScriptDomains -array discourse.omnigroup.com 
meta.discourse.o

Note that disabling JavaScript will also prevent some non-advertisement content from loading, such 
as
comments from Disqus. You may or may not find this desirable.

To re-enable JavaScript for all domains, enter this command in Terminal:

defaults delete com.c-command.EagleFiler WebToolNonJavaScriptDomains

To disable JavaScript for all domains, see EnableJavaScriptForWebTool in the esoteric preferences.

Always Importing as RTF

macOS does not save some Web sites, such as Twitter, to PDF as expected. It may only save the first 
page.
This happens both in Safari and in EagleFiler. To work around this issue, EagleFiler lets you 
override the
Web page format to always use RTF format for certain sites. To use this feature, enter a command 
like this
in Terminal:

defaults write com.c-command.EagleFiler WebToolRTFDomains -array twitter.com mobile.twitter.com

3.4.4 Importing Text Snippets

• Press the Quick entry hotkey and paste or begin typing.

• Select text in another application and invoke one of EagleFiler’s Services via a menu or keyboard
shortcut. Hold down the Option key to have EagleFiler show you the options window.

• Drag and drop text onto the source list, records list, Drop Pad, or Dock icon. Hold down the 
Option

key to have EagleFiler show you the options window.

• Put some text on the clipboard using Edit ▷ Copy and then choose Import Clipboard from Eagle-
Filer’s Dock menu or New Record ▷ From Clipboard from the File menu.

• Install some AppleScript files so that you can import directly from LaunchBar or Quicksilver.

• Run an AppleScript such as:

tell application "EagleFiler"

import text "Create an RTF file."

import plain text "Create a plain text file."
end tell

3.4.5 Importing From a Scanner

If you use a scanner to digitize paper documents, you can set the scanner software to use the To 
Import
folder or the Files folder as its output folder. Then EagleFiler will automatically import the 
scans into your
library.

Which Folder to Use

43


• The To Import folder is generally easiest, because EagleFiler will automatically detect new files 
saved
to that folder and import them into the library.

• With the Files folder, you need to choose Scan for New Files to make EagleFiler detect the new 
files.
However, there are two advantages. First, you can save the files into a particular subfolder if you
want, instead of having the new files appear at the top level. Second, some scanner apps will keep 
the
PDF file open after they’re done writing to it (which, with the To Import folder, will keep 
EagleFiler
waiting), and some scanner apps will close the PDF file after saving a page but before the entire 
scan
has been written (causing EagleFiler to import it prematurely). Manually using the Scan for New 
Files
command to tell EagleFiler when to import the new files will avoid both of these issues.

Configuring Image Capture

If macOS has built-in support for your scanner, you can access it from the Image Capture²³ 
application:

1. Click on your scanner under Devices or Shared.

2. Set the Scan To folder to the To Import folder or the Files folder in your EagleFiler library.

3. Click the Scan button.

With newer versions of macOS, you can also scan directly from the File menu in Preview.

Configuring ScanSnap Home

If you’re using a Fujitsu ScanSnap²⁴ with the newer software:

1. From the Scan window, click the icon with the pencil at the top right.

2. Under Save Destination, click the Browse... button and choose your EagleFiler library’s To
Import folder for the Save to folder.

3. Click the Save button.

Note: ScanSnap Home and ABBYY FineReader for ScanSnap do not support folders with long paths. You
can work around this by storing your EagleFiler library near the top of your home folder. If you 
need to
store it in a deeper location, or in iCloud Drive (which always has a long path), you can redirect 
the To
Import folder using a symlink so that the scanner software sees a folder at a shorter path.

Configuring ScanSnap Manager

If you’re using a Fujitsu ScanSnap²⁵ with the older software:

1. Open the Settings window for the ScanSnap Manager.

2. Select your desired profile or add a new one for scanning to EagleFiler.

3. In the Application tab, choose None (Scan To File) for the application.

²³http://support.apple.com/kb/PH17894
²⁴http://www.fujitsu.com/us/products/computing/peripheral/scanners/scansnap/
²⁵http://www.fujitsu.com/us/products/computing/peripheral/scanners/scansnap/

44


4. In the Save tab, click the Browse... button and choose your EagleFiler library’s To Import

folder for the Image saving folder.

5. In the File option tab, choose PDF for the File format. Check Convert to Searchable
PDF if you would like the ScanSnap software to perform optical character recognition (OCR).

6. Documents that you scan will now go into your EagleFiler library (whether or not EagleFiler is
running at the time).

Configuring VueScan

If you’re using VueScan:

1. In the Input tab, click the @ button next to Default folder.

2. Choose your EagleFiler library’s To Import folder.

See Also

• The How can I run optical character recognition (OCR) on my PDFs? section.

• The Import from iPhone Camera section.

• The Import From Scanner script.

• The OCR With PDFpen script.

• The Tag PDFs that Need OCR script.

3.4.6  The To Import Folder

An easy way to import into your EagleFiler library is to add files to the To Import from the Finder 
or other
applications. You can add files to the To Import folder even if EagleFiler is not currently 
running. For
example, you can save new files into this folder and add tags directly from the system’s Save 
panel.

The To Import folder is located in the library folder, next to the .eflibrary file in the Finder. 
You may
wish to drag the To Import folder to your Dock or to the Finder’s sidebar so that it’s easy to 
find.

Files added to the To Import folder are imported as top-level records in EagleFiler. You can view 
them in
the source list under Records or Unfiled.

See also: The Files Folder.

When Imports Happen

EagleFiler checks the To Import folder when the library is first opened, whenever you bring its 
window to
the front, and also periodically while the library remains open. EagleFiler imports any new files 
into the
library and then deletes them from the To Import folder.

Duplicate Files

45


If Allow duplicate files in library is unchecked, EagleFiler will move any duplicate files in the 
To Import

folder into the Unable to Import folder, rather than importing them into the library.

Don’t Copy Folders

It is recommended that you only copy files, not folders, into the To Import folder. Copying a 
folder may
take a while, and EagleFiler has no way of known when it’s completed. Thus, EagleFiler may start 
importing
before the copy is complete. It is better to use one of the other ways to import if you need to 
import a folder.

Files That Don’t Import

Sometimes you may see files that stay in the To Import folder, as if EagleFiler hasn’t noticed them 
yet.

EagleFiler tries to protect you from importing files that have not been completely written to disk 
yet. This
is because, if EagleFiler tried to copy a file that was in the process of being written, you could 
end up with
an incomplete version of the file in your library. Some data would be lost, and the file might not 
even open.

There is no sure way to know whether a file is complete, so EagleFiler assumes that it’s incomplete 
that
if the file is marked as busy or if another application still has it open. EagleFiler will wait 
until the file is
closed before importing it into the library.

Some applications may incorrectly leave files open, even after they have finished writing to them. 
EagleFiler
will leave these files in the To Import folder until they are closed. You can see which files are 
open by using
the lsof command in Terminal. If you need to import one of these files right away, you can use one 
of the
other ways to import, such as the Files folder. Restarting your Mac will also close any open files. 
EagleFiler
will then import them the next time you open the library.

EagleFiler only checks whether a file is open when importing using the To Import folder. This is 
because
EagleFiler checks the To Import folder for new files on its own schedule, which might not coincide 
with the
files being completely saved to disk. For other types of imports, you are specifically telling 
EagleFiler to
import the files right then, so EagleFiler assumes that you know the files have been completely 
written to
disk.

3.4.7  The Files Folder

The Files folder is in the library folder, next to the .eflibrary file in the Finder. As with the 
The To
Import Folder, you can import files by moving or saving them directly into the Files folder. There 
are a
few differences, however:

• You can save into any subfolder of the Files folder.

• You can put new folders into the Files folder.

• EagleFiler ignores the Allow duplicate files in library setting. When you add to the Files 
folder, you
are specifically adding to the library’s hierarchy, so EagleFiler does not check for duplicates.

• The files appear in the EagleFiler window when EagleFiler does a Scan for New Files.

46


3.4.8 Services

Enabling EagleFiler’s Services

After installing EagleFiler, you may have to log out and log in again in order for the services to 
work. To
make sure the services are enabled, open System Settings, click on Keyboard, then click on 
Shortcuts (or
Keyboard Shortcuts). Click on Services in the list at the left, then look under the Text section at 
the
right and make sure there are checkmarks next to the EagleFiler items.

Using EagleFiler’s Services

You can use EagleFiler’s import services to import text that’s selected in other applications:

• The EagleFiler: Import service lets you import the selected file, URL, or text into the current
EagleFiler library.

• The EagleFiler: Import With Options service is similar except that it lets you choose the desti-
nation library and folder and assign tags and other metadata.

First, select the text that you want to import. You can then invoke an import service:

• By Control-clicking on the selected text.

• By pressing the appropriate keyboard shortcut. By default, the keyboard shortcut for EagleFiler:
Import is Command! (Command-Shift-1), and the keyboard shortcut for EagleFiler: Import
With Options is Command-Option-! (Command-Shift-Option-1). You can customize the keyboard
shortcuts from the Keyboard pane of System Settings.

• By going to the Services submenu in the application menu.

The import services normally import text from Safari in Web archive format. The 
ImportTextAsWebArchive

esoteric preference can be used to change this to RTF if desired.

3.4.9 Save PDF to EagleFiler

Choose File ▷ Print any application and then choose Save PDF to EagleFiler from the PDF button
menu. This will convert the document to PDF format and import it into EagleFiler. Hold down the 
Option
key to have EagleFiler show you the options window.

Unlike the other methods of Importing Web Pages and URLs, in this case EagleFiler is not generating 
the
PDF, so the source URL metadata is not saved.

You can also use a custom AppleScript as a save-to-PDF action.

Installing the PDF Service

If you purchased via the Mac App Store, due to Apple’s guidelines, EagleFiler cannot automatically 
install
the PDF service that adds the Save PDF to EagleFiler command to the Print dialog. To install the
PDF service yourself:

47


1. Open the folder:

/Users/<username>/Library/PDF Services/

(See How can I open the Library folder?.) If there is no PDF Services folder inside the Library

folder, create a new folder named PDF Services.

2. Select the EagleFiler application in the Finder.

3. Choose File ▷ Make Alias.

4. Drag the new alias into the PDF Services folder and rename the alias to Save PDF to EagleFiler.

3.4.10 Share Extension

To enable EagleFiler’s system share extension, go to the Extensions pane of System Settings. In the 
Share
Menu section, make sure that EagleFiler Import is checked.

Now, the EagleFiler Import command will be available from the Share menu and Share button in any
app that supports sharing (e.g. Safari, News, Finder). You can choose EagleFiler Import to import 
the
current Web page from Safari, the current file from Preview, etc. You can hold down the Option key 
to
have EagleFiler bring up its options window before importing.

3.4.11 Importing iMessages

EagleFiler can display and search .ichat and .chat files created by Messages and iChat. Messages 
auto-
matically archives iMessage conversations in dated folders at:

/Users/<username>/Library/Containers/com.apple.iChat/Data/Library/Messages/Archive/

To import these archives, just drag and drop the folders or individual files into EagleFiler.

Note: The Messages app does not save all attached files to the conversations archive. Attachments 
that are
not archived there will not be imported into EagleFiler. Also, the macOS 11 version of Messages 
does not
seem to save chat transcript files to disk.

You can also use the PhoneView app to directly copy messages from an iOS device to your Mac and then
import them into EagleFiler.

3.4.12 Importing From iOS

There are a variety of ways to import from your iPhone or iPad into the EagleFiler library on your 
Mac.

Importing URLs

When you’re viewing a Web page or app content that has a link, you can save the link to a cloud 
service:

• Safari Reading List

48


• Instapaper

• Pocket

• Feedbin Pages

When you get back to your Mac, you can then open the saved links and import them into EagleFiler in 
the
usual manner or via script.

If your EagleFiler library is stored in iCloud Drive or another cloud service, you can directly 
save a Safari
Web page into your library in Web archive or PDF format. Tap the Share button in Safari, then tap
Options to select the desired format, then tap Save to Files and choose the To Import folder or the 
Files
folder for your library. Alternatively, you can save a bookmark file using this app.

Bulk Importing URLs

Drafts²⁶ can append URLs (using a Web Capture Template of [[url]]) to a text file in Dropbox or
iCloud Drive. You can then import all the links at once by pasting the file’s contents into 
EagleFiler’s Import
URLs... window.

Importing Files

If your EagleFiler library is stored in the cloud, there are a variety of apps you can use to 
create new files.
If you save them in your library’s Files folder or To Import folder, they will be automatically 
imported to
the library back on your Mac.

• You can use an app such as Editorial²⁷ to create new text files containing whatever content you 
want,
either typed directly or pasted from another app.

• Any printable content can be saved as a PDF file:

– You can tap the Share button and then Save PDF to iBooks.

– You can tap the Share button, then Print, then 3D Touch the print preview (or pinch to zoom
out), then Share, then Copy to iBooks.

– If you don’t have iOS 9, or in some applications that don’t natively support saving to PDF, you
can use PDF Converter.

– The Dropbox app has adds a Save to Dropbox action to the Share button that creates PDFs
with screen-sized pages.

• The iOS Mail app does not have a Share button, but you can import mail messages by using the
Print command to save them as PDF files or (on iPad) by dragging ang dropping the message to the
Files app to save them in one of EagleFiler’s folders.

• Any app content can be saved as a screenshot.

Importing Photos and Scans

See the Import from iPhone Camera section of the manual.

²⁶http://agiletortoise.com/drafts/
²⁷http://omz-software.com/editorial/

49


3.4.13 Importing via a Quick Action

On macOS 10.14 and later, you can create Quick Actions that appear as buttons in Finder’s preview 
pane
and on the Touch Bar. To make a Quick Action that imports the selected files into EagleFiler:

1. Open the Automator application.

2. Create a new workflow with Quick Action as the document type.

3. Drag an Open Finder Items action into the right portion of the window.

4. Choose EagleFiler from the Open with pop-up menu. The Automator window should now
look like:

5. Choose File ▷ Save and enter a name for your Quick Action such as EagleFiler Import.

6. The Extensions pane of System Settings lets you control whether your Quick Action is
enabled.

3.4.14 Importing via PopClip

EagleFiler has an extension that lets you import using the PopClip utility. To install, download 
the file and
then double-click it. Later, when you select some text in an app, PopClip will show the EagleFiler 
icon in
its floating window, and you can click it to import the selected text into EagleFiler.

50


3.5  Importing Mail

Importing mail into EagleFiler speeds up your mail program and backups, creates an efficient and 
secure
archive of your mail, and lets you organize and search mail messages alongside related files. The 
recommended
way to import mail varies depending on which mail program you’re using. Please find the section 
below that
corresponds to your mail program.

As described in the Basics section, you should not modify or delete the mail while EagleFiler is in 
the midst
of importing it.

What’s Imported

EagleFiler imports the entire raw source of the message, including the attachments and headers. In 
other
words, all the information is preserved; if desired, the messages can be imported back into the 
mail program
with full fidelity. (Exceptions: see the Importing Mail From Eudora and Importing Mail From 
PowerMail
sections.)

Viewing Messages

EagleFiler has native support for viewing e-mail messages.

• There are two options in the The View Menu for controlling how messages are displayed: Message ▷

Plain Text and Message ▷ Raw Source.

• The plain text font and size can be set in the Settings.

• You can use the Message ▷ Use Quick Look command in the View menu or the Quick Look command
in the the Record menu to preview attached images.

• The Reply to Message command lets you resume a conversation by opening a new message in your
e-mail program.

• You can double-click a message to open it in your e-mail program. EagleFiler opens messages using
macOS’s default viewer for .eml files, which is normally Apple Mail. To change the default viewer,
use the Open With command.

• The # column in the records list shows the number of attachments for each message. The record
viewer shows the names of the attached files. To view or extract the attachments, double-click the
message to open it in your mail program.

Mailbox (mbox) vs. Individual Message (.eml) Files

51


EagleFiler prefers to store messages in mailbox (“mbox”) files. A mailbox is a single file that 
contains lots
of e-mail messages. This is both for efficiency (one file rather than thousands for a mailbox 
containing
thousands of messages) and for compatibility with other software that can read the standard mbox 
format.
When you capture multiple e-mails at once, EagleFiler stores them in a mailbox file automatically. 
You
cannot drag message in mailbox files around to different mailboxes, though you can drag them to 
tags and
organize them that way.

EagleFiler can also store messages as individual .eml message files, one per message. This is less 
efficient (for
EagleFiler, Spotlight, Time Machine, etc.) but is more flexible because you can drag and drop the 
messages
to different folders to rearrange them. Message files can also be mixed in the same folder with 
other files
of different types, e.g. PDF or Word documents that are related to those messages. You can 
double-click a
message file to open it in Apple Mail.

You can extract individual messages out of a mailbox file by dragging and dropping them to a 
folder. You
can combine multiple message files into a mailbox using the Merge Message Files command.

Workflow for Importing Mail

Here are some tips for importing e-mails into EagleFiler:

• Imports are manually initiated. You choose when the import will happen, which messages to import,
and which EagleFiler library they will go to. Some people like to import old mail once a week, 
others
once a month or once a year.

• You can import entire mailboxes from your mail program or use smart mailboxes to help select just
the older messages for importing into EagleFiler.

• Although messages can be rearranged in EagleFiler, it is easier if you organize them into the 
mail-
boxes/folders that you want before importing them into EagleFiler.

• As with other types of imports, EagleFiler copies the messages into its library. When it’s done, 
you
can delete the messages from your mail program. It’s simpler to have each message stored in only one
place (the mail program or EagleFiler), and this way you won’t accidentally import multiple copies 
of
the same messages into EagleFiler.

• If you do end up with duplicate messages in EagleFiler, it is possible to remove them as 
described in
the Allow duplicate files in library section.

• Each time you import, a new mailbox file is created in EagleFiler, using the same name as the 
mailbox
in your mail program. If you had previously imported from that mailbox, you may already have a
mailbox file in EagleFiler with that name.

– Some people like to leave each import as a separate mailbox, e.g. so that for each mailbox there’s
one file per month or per year.

– Others prefer to have a single file that holds all the messages imported from that mailbox over
time. To do this, select the Records source and sort by title. This will group the related mailboxes
together. You can then select the related mailboxes and use the Merge Mailboxes command to
combine them into a single mailbox.  The combined mailbox will be stored in the folder that
contained the oldest of the selected mailboxes, so your organizational structure is preserved even
though the newly imported mailbox might have been imported at the top level.

Deleting Messages in Mailboxes

52


Each mailbox file stores multiple messages, and for speed and data integrity reasons, EagleFiler 
does not
modify mailbox files. Instead, when you delete a message EagleFiler hides it from view (unless you 
have
Show ▷ Deleted Messages checked). Most e-mail messages are small enough that there’s little benefit 
to
physically removing the data for deleted messages. If you need to reclaim the disk space used by 
deleted
messages, you can do this by deleting the mailbox file. First, drag the non-deleted messages to a 
folder so
that EagleFiler extracts them as individual .eml files. Then delete the mailbox. You can optionally 
use the
Merge Message Files command to recombine the .eml files into a new mailbox.

3.5.1 Importing Mail From Apple Mail

Archiving messages from Apple Mail to EagleFiler can speed up Mail and also create a safe offline 
backup
of your messages, as Time Machine backups normally don’t include the full contents of all your 
messages in
Mail.

The recommended way to import from Apple Mail is to select some messages or mailboxes and press the
capture key. (By default this is the F1 key, but depending on your Mac’s keyboard settings you may 
need
to press fn-F1.) EagleFiler will copy the entire message (including attachments) to its library, 
along with
the message status and flagged indicators from Mail and any keywords, projects, and notes from 
MailTags.

• If one or more messages is selected, EagleFiler imports only those messages.

• If no messages are selected, EagleFiler imports every message in the selected mailboxes as well 
as all
of their submailboxes. To deselect a message (to tell EagleFiler to capture the whole mailbox) you 
can
Command-click on the message. In order to capture from special mailboxes (e.g. smart mailboxes or
the special Inbox that contains the other inboxes), you will need to select the messages within them
(e.g. using Edit ▷ Select All).

Note: On macOS 10.14 and later, the first time you press the capture key you will need to grant 
EagleFiler
Full Disk Access.

By default, EagleFiler imports a single selected message as a .eml message file and multiple 
selected messages
as a mailbox file. Please see the Importing Mail section for more information about these formats.

Importing Multiple Mailboxes

To import multiple whole mailboxes at once, first select the mailboxes in Mail’s sidebar. (Make 
sure that
no messages are selected.) You can either Command-click to select individual mailboxes or select a 
whole
range of mailboxes by clicking on the first one and then Shift-clicking on the last one. Once the 
mailboxes
are selected, use the Edit ▷ Select All command to select all the messages (or make sure that none 
are
selected). Then press EagleFiler’s capture key. It will import all the messages in the mailboxes, 
as well as
any submailboxes.

Importing Message Files

To import multiple messages as individual .eml files instead of as mailbox files, capture one 
message at
a time or use the Import From Apple Mail script. You can also drag and drop individual messages from
Mail to EagleFiler. Unlike using the capture key, this will not import message metadata or MailTags 
into
EagleFiler.

Note: It is not recommended to drag multiple messages at once, as on some versions of macOS only the
53


first message will be sent to EagleFiler. There are also some cases where Mail may not save the 
dragged
message to disk, and thus EagleFiler will not be able to import it. You can work around both of 
these issues
by importing using the capture key or by dragging first to the Finder and then from Finder to 
EagleFiler.

Importing Mailbox Hierarchies

Another way to import from Apple Mail is to drag and drop folders or mailboxes from the Finder. This
makes it possible to import whole hierarchies of mail. The mailboxes are stored in the folder:

/Users/<username>/Library/Mail

(See How can I open the Library folder?.) Inside the V8 (or other V# folder for previous versions 
of macOS)
is a folder for each account (named with a UUID or your e-mail address, and inside the account 
folder a
folder for each mailbox.

When importing .mbox folders from Mail, you generally do not want to import via the To Import 
folder or
the Files folder, as this would prevent EagleFiler from converting the mail to the standard mbox 
format. It
is better to drag and drop to the Dock icon or into EagleFiler’s window, or to use the capture key 
from the
Finder.

On macOS 10.14 and later, the first time you import from Mail’s folder you will need to grant 
EagleFiler
Full Disk Access.

Importing via Mail’s File Menu

Yet another way to import from Apple Mail is to use Mail’s File ▷ Save As... menu command. This 
works
even if EagleFiler is not running, and you can select anywhere in The Files Folder or the The To 
Import
Folder to save the file. Be sure to choose Raw Message Source from the Format pop-up menu. If a 
single
message is selected, Mail will save it in .eml format. If multiple messages are selected (and you 
have macOS
10.12 or later), Mail will save them in mbox format. For larger mailboxes, it may initially look 
like the save
didn’t happen, but Mail will eventually create the file.

Importing Attachments

EagleFiler tries to import complete messages, including any attached files. For messages downloaded 
from
POP mail servers or stored in local (On My Mac) mailboxes, this should always succeed because Mail
stores the attachment data with the message. For messages from IMAP and Exchange mail servers, the
attachment data may or may not have been downloaded to your Mac.

You can tell Mail that you want it to download the attachments to your Mac. To do this, go to the 
Accounts

pane of Mail’s settings and (for each account) tell it to download the attachments:

• macOS 11.0 through 10.12: On the Account Information tab, for Download Attachments choose
All. Additionally, do not use the new Optimize Storage OS feature to automatically remove e-mail
attachments.

• macOS 10.11 through 10.9: Mail always downloads complete messages.

• macOS 10.8 and earlier: On the Advanced tab, for Keep copies of messages for offline viewing

choose All messages and their attachments.

Note that this is advisory, and Mail may not always store all the attachments on your Mac, 
especially if
54


disk space is running low. If you try to import a message whose attachments have not been 
downloaded,
EagleFiler will report a Missing Apple Mail Attachment error and import only the non-attachments
parts   of the message. This is good because it alerts you to a message that needs to be fully 
downloaded.
After following the instructions below to download the message, you can try the import again. Then 
you’ll
end up with a complete offline copy of the message, whereas a Time Machine backup would only 
contain the
parts of the message that Mail was currently caching.

Missing Messages and Attachments

When importing from Apple Mail, EagleFiler may report a Missing Apple Mail Messages or Missing
Apple Mail Attachment error. This indicates that the message had not been fully downloaded to your
Mac. You should tell Mail to download the messages and then try the import again. There are several 
ways
to do this:

• For a small number of messages that are missing attachments, it’s easiest to open the messages for
viewing in Mail. This will trigger Mail to fully download them. You can select the error(s) in Ea-
gleFiler’s Errors window and Option-click the Reveal button. This opens the message files in Mail.
Once the attachments have loaded in the message windows, you can close the windows and then try
the import again.

• For a larger number of messages, you can select all the messages to import in Mail and run the
Download Apple Mail Messages script. Once this has completed, press the capture key with the same
messages selected to import them.

• For very large numbers of messages, the script can take a while. A faster option is to 
Option-drag and
drop the entire mailbox to the On My Mac section of Mail’s mailbox list. This will create a local
copy of the mailbox with all the messages fully downloaded.

Please note that moving or copying an IMAP message to an On My Mac mailbox will not cause
Mail to download the attachments. It may, in fact, mark the attachments as downloaded even though
they are missing. And if you then open the message it will be disassociated from the IMAP server so
Mail will not be able to fetch the attachments. Thus, it’s best to import the IMAP messages directly
from their original mailbox so that EagleFiler can warn you if any attachments are missing and Mail
can download them if necessary.

Note: Mail does not allow you to copy special mailboxes such as Sent. However, you can temporarily
create a Sent2 mailbox and assign that as the special Sent mailbox in the Mailbox Behaviors
settings. Then Mail will let you copy the original Sent mailbox, which now appears with a regular
icon. This workaround unfortunately does not work for the inbox.

Importing Conversations

If you have View ▷ Organize by Conversation checked, Mail behaves differently depending on whether
you have Use classic layout checked in the Viewing settings.

• With the classic layout, if you select a message with a blue triangle and the triangle is 
collapsed,
EagleFiler captures all the messages in the conversation from the selected mailbox(es). If the 
triangle
is expanded, EagleFiler captures only the messages that are selected in the message list, even 
though
more messages may be displayed in the message viewer.

• With the widescreen layout, if you select a message with a triangle, EagleFiler captures all the 
messages
in the conversation from the selected mailbox(es), regardless of whether the triangle is expanded. 
(As
with the classic layout, you can select individual messages indented below the triangle if you only 
want
to capture those.)

55


To import both sides of a conversation, Command-click in the mailbox list to select the Sent 
mailbox as
well as the mailbox containing the received messages. Then Mail’s conversation view will show both 
types
of messages in the list. You may also find it helpful to use a smart mailbox to display related 
messages from
different mailboxes, and then capture from the smart mailbox.

Importing an entire mailbox is much simpler.  You can always use Edit ▷ Select All to select all the
messages, regardless of whether Mail is in conversation mode or which triangles are expanded.

Importing Only Newer Messages

If you’ve previously imported some messages from Mail and now want to do a new import without 
creating
additional copies of the old messages, there are several options:

• The simplest solution is to make sure that each message is only stored in one place: Mail or 
EagleFiler.
If you import using the capture key, the imported messages will be selected in Mail. After the 
import
has completed, you can press the Delete key to move them to the trash. Then you won’t have to worry
about importing them again the next time.

• You can use a smart mailbox in Mail to find all the messages newer than a certain date, i.e. the 
last
time you imported into EagleFiler. Each time you do an import, update the smart mailbox to the
latest date.

Importing New Mail Messages Automatically

It’s most efficient to import messages in bulk from Apple Mail, as described above. However, you 
can also
set up a rule in Mail that uses the Import From Apple Mail script to automatically import each new 
message
into EagleFiler as soon as Mail receives it.

Apple Mail “.mbox” Mailboxes

Apple Mail stores its mail in two types of folders whose names end with .mbox, however neither of 
these uses
the actual mbox format:

• “Live” .mbox folders contain .emlx files. EagleFiler can import these folders via drag and 
drop—for
best results, drag the whole folder, not the individual files—or by using the capture key from 
within
Mail.

• “Archive” .mbox folders can be saved from Apple Mail using the Export Mailbox... command.
These contain a single file called mbox. EagleFiler can import these folders via drag and drop, 
however
this is not recommended because Mail does not properly generate the mbox format, attachments may
be missing, and the mbox file does not include the message metadata. For better data fidelity it is
recommended that you import the mailbox back into Mail and then capture the messages from Mail
to EagleFiler, rather than importing archive mailbox to EagleFiler directly.

Capturing When Mail Is Busy

In order to safely read Apple Mail’s message data, Mail should not be in the process of downloading 
messages
from the server or moving them between mailboxes when you press the capture key.

macOS 10.12 and macOS 10.11: You can look in the Activity pane at the bottom of the mailbox list to
make sure that Mail is idle. EagleFiler will report an error if it tries to import an e-mail 
message that was
not completely written to disk.

56


macOS 10.10 and earlier: EagleFiler will report an error if Mail is busy. The Activity window is a 
more
accurate measure of this than the Mail Activity pane in Mail’s main viewer window. If you press the
capture key and EagleFiler detects that Mail is busy, it will suggest that you try again later. You 
can click
Cancel and wait until Mail has finished downloading mail or use the Mailbox menu to take it 
offline. You
can also click Capture Anyway to proceed if you know that Mail is not doing anything with the 
messages
that you had asked it to capture.

Duplicate Messages

When importing from Apple Mail, EagleFiler automatically skips a message if it is an exact 
duplicate of
another message in the same mailbox that is currently being imported. Thus, it can be normal for the
mailbox in EagleFiler to show fewer messages than the mailbox in Apple Mail. When EagleFiler skips a
message, it includes a line in the note of the imported mailbox to tell you this.

• You can click here²⁸ to have EagleFiler log to Console when it is skipping a duplicate message, 
or click
here²⁹ to turn off the logging.

• You can click here³⁰ to have EagleFiler not skip duplicate messages, e.g. to more easily verify 
that the
proper number of messages were imported, or click here³¹ to skip them again.

Gmail and “All Mail”

When importing from a Gmail account in Apple Mail, the messages may end up in an EagleFiler mailbox
called All Mail, even if you had selected the messages in a mailbox of a different name. This 
happens
because the message exists in both mailboxes on the Gmail server, and Apple Mail sometimes saves 
space
by only storing a single copy of the message. It tells EagleFiler that the message is in All Mail, 
since
that’s where it’s storing the message, so that’s the mailbox name EagleFiler uses. You can prevent 
this from
happening by configuring Gmail not to show the All Mail mailbox in Apple Mail:

1. In Gmail, click on the gear menu at the top right and select Settings.

2. Click on Labels (which is next to General at the top of the screen).

3. In the System labels section, uncheck Show in IMAP on the line for All Mail.

²⁸x-eaglefiler://default?k=LogMailImportSkippedMessages&v=YES
²⁹x-eaglefiler://default?k=LogMailImportSkippedMessages&v=NO
³⁰x-eaglefiler://default?k=SkipDuplicateMessages&v=NO

³¹x-eaglefiler://default?k=SkipDuplicateMessages&v=YES

57


When capturing a Gmail message, you may get an error saying that EagleFiler couldn’t find the All 
Mail
mailbox on disk. This happens for a related reason, that Mail is choosing to only store the message 
in the
non-archive mailbox. Hiding All Mail from IMAP will also fix this problem. Or, you can copy the 
messages
to     an On My Mac Apple Mail mailbox before capturing them or choose Mailbox ▷ Export Mailbox...
and then import the exported file into EagleFiler.

Mail Perspectives

If you have a Mail Perspectives window open (and it’s frontmost), EagleFiler will capture the 
selected
messages from that window, rather than from the regular viewer window.

3.5.2  Importing Mail From Airmail
Importing Individual Messages

There are two ways to import a single message from Airmail to EagleFiler. Both will import the 
message as
a .eml file:

• Select the message, choose File ▷ Export to EML, and save the file in the To Import folder or the
Files folder.

• Drag and drop the message into an EagleFiler window (not its Dock icon). With the current version
of Airmail, this does not work on macOS 10.14. On macOS 10.15 and later, it works when dragging a
single message; if you drag multiple message, only one will be given to EagleFiler.

Importing Multiple Messages

1. Create a new folder in Airmail, e.g. called To Export.

2. Drag into it the messages that you wish to export.

3. Go to Airmail ▷ Settings... ▷ Rules.

4. Click + and choose Add Rule. Enter Export as the name and click Done. The rule should
have Enable unchecked.

5. From the All Inboxes pop-up menu, select the To Export folder that you just created.

6. Change the Then of the rule to Export and select the destination folder from the next pop-up
menu.

7. Select the Action checkbox and click Record Shortcut. Enter a keyboard shortcut (e.g.
Control-Option-Command-E). Click Save.

8. You can now type the keyboard shortcut to export whatever messages are in the To Export
folder. In the future, you can just add new messages to that folder and press the keyboard
shortcut to export them; it’s not necessary to create additional folders or rules.

58


3.5.3 Importing Mail From Entourage

To import from Entourage, select some messages (or a folder) and press the capture key (F1 or 
fn-F1).
EagleFiler will preserve the message flags, categories, and projects. EagleFiler skips messages 
that have
been assigned the “OmitFromArchive” category in Entourage.

To import from multiple folders at a time, use a saved search (a.k.a. custom view) to show messages 
from
multiple folders at once (for example, use “From Contains @” to show all messages), select all the 
messages,
and press the capture key.

Dragging individual mailboxes or messages from Entourage to EagleFiler may work, but using the 
capture
key is recommended because it is more reliable.

3.5.4 Importing Mail From Eudora

Mailboxes for Eudora 6 are stored in the Mail Folder folder inside the Eudora Folder folder, and 
they
can be dragged from the Finder into EagleFiler. They are not actually in mbox format (for example, 
the
attachments are removed), but the format is close enough that EagleFiler will be able to read most 
of the
messages. Running the mailboxes through Eudora Mailbox Cleaner³² or Emailchemy³³ before importing
them into EagleFiler may produce better results. The .toc files are not mailboxes and should not be
imported.

3.5.5 Importing Mail From GyazMail

Select some mailboxes and choose File ▷ Export ▷ Unix mbox.... Then drag the exported files into
EagleFiler.

3.5.6 Importing Mail From MailMate

Importing the Selected Messages as Message Files

There is a built-in bundle for importing from EagleFiler. First, go to the Bundles tab of 
MailMate’s settings
window and make sure that EagleFiler is checked. Then you can select messages in MailMate and choose
Command ▷ EagleFiler ▷ Add to import them into EagleFiler. This will preserve any IMAP keywords
from MailMate as tags in EagleFiler.

Importing the Selected Messages as Mailbox Files

Recent versions of MailMate include a bundle that adds the Command ▷ Export command, which exports
the messages in mbox format. You can then import the mbox into EagleFiler. This is the most 
efficient way
of importing from MailMate.

Manually Importing Message Files

You can import individual messages from MailMate by dragging and dropping them.

³²http://homepage.mac.com/aamann/Eudora Mailbox Cleaner.html

³³http://www.weirdkid.com/products/emailchemy/

59


To import a whole mailbox, find its folder in the folder:

/Users/<username>/Library/Application Support/MailMate/Messages/IMAP/

and drag it into EagleFiler. EagleFiler will import all the .eml files and skip the .emlh files.

Automatically Importing Messages

You can set MailMate to automatically import all messages added to a particular mailbox (even the 
inbox)
to EagleFiler:

1. Select the mailbox and choose Mailbox ▷ Edit Mailbox....

2. Click on the Rules tab.

3. Click + to create a new rule.

4. Set the Description to EagleFiler Import.

5. Click the + button at the bottom of the window to create an action.

6. Click on Move to Mailbox and change it to Run Command.

7. Click on No script selected and change it to EagleFiler ▷ Add.

8. Click OK to save the rule.

3.5.7 Importing Mail From Mail Pilot

You can import individual messages from Mail Pilot 1.1³⁴ or later by dragging and dropping them.

3.5.8 Importing Mail From Mailsmith

Select some messages and press the capture key. EagleFiler will preserve the notes (as EagleFiler 
notes) and
message status and label (as EagleFiler tags).

Please note that Mailsmith only reports to EagleFiler which messages are selected, not which 
mailboxes are.
So if you select a mailbox and no messages, EagleFiler will report an error.

Note: If you want to separate messages by age before importing them into EagleFiler, you may find 
it helpful
to use Email Archiver³⁵.

3.5.9 Importing Mail From Mbox Files

EagleFiler supports mbox³⁶, the standard format for importing and exporting e-mail messages. Each 
mailbox
is stored in a separate text-like file, and the mailbox files can be organized into folders.

³⁴http://mindsense.co/blog/mail-pilot-for-mac-1-1/
³⁵http://www.garrison.com.au/freeware/emailarchiver.html
³⁶http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Mbox

60


Most e-mail apps have a command to export messages in mbox format. You can also export from Gmail to
mbox format using Google Takeout.

To import mbox files into EagleFiler, just follow the regular Importing Existing Files 
instructions.

3.5.10 Importing Mail From Outlook

The recommended way to import from Microsoft Outlook 365, Outlook 2016, or Outlook 2011 is to select
some messages (or a folder and no messages) and press the capture key (F1 or fn-F1). EagleFiler will
preserve the message flags, read status, and categories. EagleFiler skips messages that have been 
assigned
the “OmitFromArchive” category in Outlook.

Note: If you are using a test version of Outlook, the “New Outlook” switch at the top of the window 
needs
to be Off, as the in-progress “new look” version of Outlook does not support AppleScript yet. In 
some
versions of Outlook, there is no way to turn the switch off after turning it on; EagleFiler will 
offer an option
to   do this when you press the capture key.

Note: Dragging individual mailboxes or messages from Outlook to EagleFiler may also work, but using 
the
capture key is recommended because it is more reliable.

Importing Message Files

To import messages as individual .eml files instead of as mailbox files, capture one message at a 
time or use
the Import From Outlook script.

Importing All Your Mail

To import all your mail at once, use a smart folder to show all the messages:

1. In the upper-right corner of the Outlook window, click in the search box. This will make the

Search tab active.

2. In the Search tab, select All Mailboxes.

3. Then click the Advanced button.

4. Click on the Item Contains pop-up menu and change it to say Date Created. The pop-up
menu next to it should now say Any Date.

5. You can now use Edit ▷ Select All to select all of your messages at once and import them by
pressing the capture key.

61


EagleFiler creates a mailbox file for each folder that you imported messages from. The folders are 
preserved,
but their hierarchy is not. That is, all the mailboxes are created at the same level; if desired, 
you can create
folders in EagleFiler and drag and drop the mailboxes organize them.

Importing a Folder and Its Subfolders

To import from multiple folders at a time, use a smart folder to show messages from multiple 
folders at
once:

1. Select the folder in Outlook.

2. In the upper-right corner of the Outlook window, click in the search box. This will make the

Search tab active.

3. In the Search tab, select Subfolders.

4. Then click the Advanced button.

5. Click on the Item Contains pop-up menu and change it to say Date Created. The pop-up
menu next to it should now say Any Date.

6. You can now use Edit ▷ Select All to select all of the messages at once and import them by
pressing the capture key.

As with “Importing All Your Mail” above, folders are preserved but their hierarchy is not.

Importing PST Files From Outlook for Windows

There are several ways to import .pst files from the Windows version of Outlook to EagleFiler:

• If you have Microsoft Office for Mac, you can import the PST file into the Mac version of 
Outlook³⁷.
Then select the messages and press the capture key.

Note: The Mac version of Outlook has a bug that can prevent it from exporting some messages imported
from Windows Outlook. This can prevent the message bodies from transferring to EagleFiler, making
the messages appear blank (aside from the headers). To work around this bug, instead of importing 
via
the capture key, import by dragging the mail folder (or individual messages) from Outlook to a 
folder
in the Finder; this will export the messages (but not the message flags, read status, or 
categories). You
can then drag the files from the Finder into EagleFiler to import them. Sometimes this won’t work,
either, as the message files exported by Outlook are also flawed.

• You can import the messages into EagleFiler with the help of another mail client, such as Apple 
Mail.
Make sure that both Windows Outlook and Apple Mail are set to connect to the same IMAP server.
In Outlook, drag the messages to a folder on this IMAP server. The messages will then appear in that
folder in Apple Mail. Then follow the Importing Mail From Apple Mail instructions.

• You can use a Mac utility such as PST Converter Pro³⁸ to convert the PST file to mbox format. Then
import the mbox files into EagleFiler.

• You can use a Windows utility such as O2M³⁹ that can convert the PST file to mbox format. Then
import the mbox files into EagleFiler.

³⁷http://www.macworld.com/article/2151263/importing-windows-outlook-messages-into-apples-mail.html
³⁸http://mjtsai.com/app/pst-converter-pro

³⁹http://www.littlemachines.com

62


Importing OLM Files From Outlook for Mac

To import an Outlook for Mac Data File (.olm), first import it into Outlook, then follow the regular
instructions at the top of this section to import from Outlook to EagleFiler.

3.5.11 Importing Mail From Outspring Mail

The messages are stored in the folder:

/Users/<username>/Library/Application Support/Outspring Mail/

as individual .eml files. (See How can I open the Library folder?.) They can be imported into 
EagleFiler
via drag and drop or by pressing the capture key in the Finder.

3.5.12 Importing Mail From Postbox
Postbox 6: Importing the Selected Messages

Select the messages in Postbox and choose File ▷ Save As ▷ File. Choose a folder in your EagleFiler
library, e.g. the To Import folder. Postbox will save each message as a .eml file. For large 
numbers of
messages, EagleFiler will be faster if you merge the .eml files into a single mailbox using the 
Merge Message
Files command.

Postbox 5: Importing Individual Messages

You can drag and drop the selected messages from Postbox to EagleFiler. You can also use the File ▷ 
Save
As ▷ File command to save a message in Mail Files format. Either way you will end up with one .eml 
file
per message in EagleFiler.

For large numbers of messages, EagleFiler will be faster if you merge the .eml files into a single 
mailbox
using the Merge Message Files command.

Postbox 5: Importing Whole Mailboxes

Before importing into EagleFiler, make sure that Postbox has completely downloaded all the messages 
and
use the Compact Folders command. The POP/local mailboxes are stored in the folder:

~/Library/Application Support/Postbox/Profiles/<profile>/Mail/Local Folders/

(See How can I open the Library folder?.) The IMAP mailboxes are stored in the folder:

~/Library/Application Support/Postbox/Profiles/<profile>/ImapMail/

The mailbox files have no extension and can be dragged from the Finder to EagleFiler. The .msf 
files are
not mailboxes and can be ignored or deleted from EagleFiler’s library.

63


3.5.13 Importing Mail From PowerMail

There are three ways to import from PowerMail into EagleFiler:

The Export Command

Select some folders or messages and choose File ▷ Database ▷ Export. Choose what you want to export
and click the right arrow button. Select Unix Mailbox and make sure that Include attachments and
All attachments are both selected; then click Go Ahead. Choose a folder in your EagleFiler library 
(e.g.
The To Import Folder) and click Save.

This method will preserve any attachments that are still in PowerMail’s Attachments folder. 
Attachments
that you have moved out of that folder will be preserved so long as PowerMail can still track where 
they
were moved to. The message status and label are not preserved.

The Capture Key

Select some folders or messages and press the capture key. This method is very convenient, and it 
preserves
the message status and label, but (due to limitations of PowerMail) it does not preserve the 
attachments.

Importing via Apple Mail

Because of PowerMail’s limitations with attachments, you may find it easier to import via Apple 
Mail for
full message fidelity. If your mail is stored on the server in IMAP mailboxes, you can simply 
configure Apple
Mail to access the same mail account. You can still use PowerMail for your regular e-mail needs, 
then follow
the instructions in the Importing Mail From Apple Mail section when it’s time to import into 
EagleFiler.

3.5.14 Importing Mail From Thunderbird and Eudora 8

To import an individual message from Thunderbird, select the message and choose File ▷ Save As ▷ 
File.
Save the .eml file into EagleFiler’s To Import folder.

To import whole mailboxes from Thunderbird, make sure that Thunderbird has completely downloaded all
the messages and use the Compact Folders command. The POP/local mailboxes are stored in the folder:

/Users/<username>/Library/Thunderbird/Profiles/<profile>/Mail/Local Folders/

(To open the Library folder, go to the Go menu in the Finder and hold down the Option key.) The IMAP
mailboxes are stored in the folder:

/Users/<username>/Library/Thunderbird/Profiles/<profile>/ImapMail/

The mailbox files have no extension and can be dragged from the Finder to EagleFiler. The .msf 
files are
not mailboxes and can be ignored or deleted from EagleFiler’s library.

To import an individual message from Thunderbird, use the File ▷ Save As ▷ File command to save the
message in Mail Files (.eml) format.

64


3.5.15 Importing Mail From Webmail/Gmail

Web-based mail services store your data on the server. To import it into EagleFiler, you must first 
get it
onto your Mac. To do this, you can:

• Connect to the mail account using a mail client and then import from that client into EagleFiler. 
This
is described in the Importing Mail section.

• Export individual messages from Webmail to .eml files and then import them into EagleFiler. In
Gmail, this is possible with the Show Original command. Other mail providers may call it Show
Raw Source.

• Export whole mailboxes from Webmail to mbox format and then import the mbox files to EagleFiler.
For example, with Gmail you can export mailboxes using the Takeout feature.

• If your Webmail does not work with mail clients and does not have an export feature, you can drag
and drop the message text from your Web browser, use File ▷ Save to save messages into EagleFiler’s
To Import folder, or print and choose Save PDF to EagleFiler.

3.6  Drag and Drop

This section summarizes the different ways that you can use drag and drop in EagleFiler:

Source List

Folders

Drag a folder or mailbox onto a folder to rearrange the folders in the source list. Drag a file from
the records list onto a folder to move it into that folder. Drag onto the Records source to move
the record to the top-level Files folder; it will then appear under Unfiled.

Drag from another application onto a folder in order to import directly into that folder.
EagleFiler supports spring-loaded folders. If you drag and hover over a collapsed folder, it will
expand  so that you can drag onto one of its subfolders.

Smart Folders

Drag a record onto a smart folder to apply the smart folder actions that you’ve set in the Edit
Smart Folder. . . window.

Drag and drop smart folders into folders to rearrange the source list.

Tags

EagleFiler supports hierarchical tags. Drag and drop tags to rearrange them in the source list.
Drag records onto a tag to assign them that tag.

Drag from another application onto a tag in order to import the dragged items and then assign
that tag.

Records List

With a folder selected in the source list, drag onto the records list to move the records into that 
folder
(if dragging from another EagleFiler window) or to import into that folder (if dragging from another
application).

Drag from the records list onto a folder or tag in the source list in order to move the records or 
assign
that tag.

65


Drag to the Finder to create copy the files from EagleFiler.
Drag to Terminal to enter the file’s path.

Drag to a text view in another application to create links to the selected records.

Record Viewer

You can drag and drop text and images to/from other applications as normal.

Notes

You can drag and drop text and images to/from other applications as normal.

Drop Pad and Dock

Drag from another application onto EagleFiler’s Drop Pad window or Dock icon to import into the
current library.

When dragging from another application, you can drag files, URLs, or text to import them into 
EagleFiler.

3.7  Shortcuts

This section summarizes EagleFiler’s built-in keyboard shortcuts. Many other keyboard shortcuts are 
avail-
able in the menus, and you can search the menu commands using the Search field in the Help menu. You
can customize the keyboard shortcuts from the Keyboard pane in System Settings. You can even add
keyboard shortcuts for your favorite named text styles.

Importing

F1

Capture Key. (Depending on your settings in System Settings, you may need to press fn-F1.)

Option-F1

Capture with options. (Depending on your settings in System Settings, you may need to press
fn-Option-F1.)

Command-Shift-1

The “EagleFiler: Import” system service. Type this from another application to import the
selected text or URL into EagleFiler.

Command-Shift-Option-1

The “EagleFiler: Import With Options” system service. Type this from another application to
import the selected text or URL into EagleFiler. EagleFiler will show the options window so that
you can set the destination folder, label, tags, notes, etc.

Batch Change

Shift-Command-A

Append.

Shift-Command-R

Replace.

Command-3

Choose label.

66


Enter or Command-Return

OK.

Capture With Options and Quick Entry
Command-1

Choose library.

Command-2

Choose folder. Then you can select a folder by typing the first few letters of its name.

Command-3

Choose label.

Command-K

Reset.

Enter or Command-Return

Capture or Save.

Control-Shift-Tab

Select the previous tab (Metadata, Source, Text). The shortcut is Command- on macOS 10.11
and earlier.

Control-Tab

Select the next tab (Metadata, Source, Text). The shortcut is Command- on macOS 10.11 and
earlier.

Info inspector

Command-click title bar

Show a path menu for the file being inspected.

Command-I

Open the Info inspector and bring it to the front.

Command-Option-I

Open the Info inspector without bringing it to the front.

Command-Shift-E

Open the Info inspector with the Notes field ready for editing.

Command-Shift-T

Make the tags field active.

Tags inspector

Spacebar

Toggle whether the tag is assigned to the selected records.

Navigating browser windows
Command-Option-F

Make the search field active.

Command-Shift-T

Make the tag bar active.

Tab (in source list) or Control-Shift-Tab (in record viewer)

Make the records list active.

67


Tab (in records list) or Shift-Tab (in source list)

Make the record viewer active.

Control-Tab (in record viewer) or Shift-Tab (in records list)

Make the source list active.

Editing a rich text file or notes
Option-Tab

Begin a new bulleted list.

Tab

Increase the indentation of the current list item.

Shift-Tab

Decrease the indentation of the current list item.

Records list

Enter or Return

Edit the filename of the selected record.

Option-Enter or Option-Return

Edit the title of the selected record.

Delete

Delete the selected records (if viewing multiple sources or a folder) or untag them (if viewing a
tag).

Option-Delete

Delete the selected records.

Command–Up Arrow

View the container of the current folder or mailbox (i.e. go up a level in the hierarchy).

Command–Down Arrow

View the contents of the selected folder or mailbox (i.e. go down a level in the hierarchy).

Down Arrow or Command-Control–Down Arrow

View the next record. Down Arrow works in the records list. Spacebar works in the records
list and in uneditable viewers. Command-Control–Down arrow works everywhere, even from an
inspector window.

Up Arrow or Command-Control–Up Arrow

View the previous record.

Left Arrow

Change the keyboard focus to the source list.

Double-click

Open a folder or mailbox in the same window, like Contents of Record, or open a file in the
external viewer.

Command-double-click

Open With External Viewer.

Option-double-click

Open Source URL.

68


Shift

Hold the Shift key while mousing over a record to see the tooltip faster. The tooltip shows the
path and source URL.

Spacebar

Quick Look

Option-Spacebar

Slideshow

Three-Finger Swipe Left

Select the previous record.

Three-Finger Swipe Right

Select the next record.

Source list

Left/Right Arrow

Collapse or expand the selected sources. If the selected source is already expanded and you press
Right Arrow, changes the keyboard focus to the records list and selects the first record.

Option-Left/Right Arrow (or Option-click disclosure triangle)

Collapse or expand the selected sources and all their children.

Command-click

Select multiple sources at once.

Command–Up Arrow

Select the enclosing folder in the source list.

Double-click

Open in New Window.

Enter or Return

Edit the filename of the selected source.

Type-selection

Type the first few letters of a source’s name to select it.

Dragging from Source list or Records list
Drag to Finder

Create a copy of the file.

Command-Option-Drag to Finder

Hold down before starting the drag to create an alias of the file.

Command-drag to a tag source

Assign that tag and unassign all others.

Drag to an EagleFiler browser window

Copy the record to another library.

Drag to Terminal

Enter the file’s path.

Hiding

Option-click on another application

Switch to that application and hide EagleFiler. While hidden, EagleFiler will temporarily show
itself if you press the Capture with options key and then re-hide itself automatically.

69


Option-click on an EagleFiler window

Bring EagleFiler to the front and hide the other applications.

Double-click on the horizontal split bar

Hide or show the record viewer.

Tags Bar

Command-Shift-T

Move the focus to the tags bar.

Return or Comma

End the current tag so that you can begin typing the next one.


Tab

Toolbar

Move focus to the search field. Press Tab-Tab to move to the source list or Tab-Tab-Tab to move
to the records list.

Option-click New RTF

Creates a new plain text file.

Option-click Tags

Opens the Tag Cloud window.

Windows

Command-‘

Move focus to next window.

Command-Shift-‘

Move focus to previous window.

4  Browser Windows

Each browser window contains a source list, a records list, a record viewer, and a toolbar. Drag 
the split
bars to resize the different portions of the window. Double-click a split bar to collapse it 
entirely. Hold down
the Option key while dragging a split bar to grow or shrink the window as you drag.

You can use the Tab key to move between the different panes using the keyboard. When editing in the
record viewer, you may need to type Control-Tab rather than Tab (which will insert a tab character 
into the
document).

4.1  Source List

The top-level sources are:

Library

70


Records

All the records in the library, from all the folders (except the trash). (If you only want to see 
the
top-level records, see the Unfiled smart folder, below.) Click the triangle next to the Records
source to expand it and see folder sources matching the folders in the library’s Files folder in
the Finder. You can drag and drop files and folders to re-arrange their hierarchy.

Trash

The records that have been deleted from the library, but which are still available until you empty
the trash. This corresponds to the library’s Trash folder in the Finder.

Search For

Recently Added

The last 25 files that were added to the library.

Recently Modified

The last 25 files that were modified within EagleFiler or using another application.

Unfiled

Files that are at the top level of the library, e.g. ones that are directly in the Files folder 
rather
than in one of its sub-folders. For example, if you like to categorize all your files into 
subfolders,
Unfiled shows you all the files remaining to be categorized.

Untagged

Files anywhere in the library that do not have any tags (other than “note”).


Tags

Tag sources behave like playlists in iTunes or albums in Photos. Select a tag source to view all the
records with that tag. You can drag records onto a tag source to assign that tag to them. Hold down
the Command key to assign the tag and unassign all others (i.e. “move” it to that tag). Each record
may appear in any number of tag sources. Deleting a record from a tag source unassigns that tag; the
record remains in the library. You can drag and drop tags to re-arrange their hierarchy.

Selecting Multiple Sources

You can select more than one source at a time to view all their contents at once or to winnow by 
tag. For
example:

• To see all the messages in either of two mailboxes, select both mailboxes at once.

• To see all the flagged files in a folder, select the folder and the flagged tag.

• To see all the records that are both flagged and unread, select both the flagged and unread tags.
You can select any number of tags at once to show their intersection.

Importing via the Source List

Drag files here to import them. You can drop onto a folder or tag source to import files directly 
into that
folder or to import them and assign that tag. You can use Expos´e mid-drag to bring a window to the 
front
and reveal the source that you want to drop onto.

Multiple Windows

71


You can double-click a record or smart folder source to open it in a new window. For an editable 
smart
folder, Option-double-click to open it in a new window instead of editing the smart folder.

Navigating

You can type the first few letters of a source’s name to select it. See also the collapsing and 
expanding
Shortcuts.

Hiding and Showing

To hide and show the source list, you can use the Show ▷ Source List command in The View Menu. You
can also drag or double-click the divider.

Renaming

With a source selected, press Return or Enter to edit its name.

Reordering

The source list is sorted alphabetically, so you can change where a source appears in the list by 
renaming it.
For example, you can make a source sort to the top by putting ! or @ at the beginning of its name 
or at the
bottom by putting z at the beginning of its name.

Custom Folder Icons

You can customize folder and smart folder icons in the source list. First copy an image to the 
clipboard
(e.g. using Preview). Then Control-click on a source and choose Paste Icon. Custom icons can be 
removed
from the Get Info window in Finder. Tag abbreviation symbols are not images, and so cannot be set 
via
pasting. They can be specified as emoji or Unicode symbols in the Tags inspector.

72


73


4.2  Records List

The records list shows the contents of the selected source(s). If a folder or tag is the selected 
source, you
can drag files into the records list to import them with that folder or tag.

The columns are:


Tags

The abbreviations for the assigned tags (e.g. • for unread).

Count (#)

The number of pages in a PDF, messages in a mailbox, or attachments in a message.


Icon

Title

An icon that shows the record’s type.

The subject of a message or title of a document. For most document types, the title is separate from
the filename, e.g. it’s the original page title stored in a Web archive, manually set in the 
Properties
window in TextEdit or in Microsoft Word, or manually in the sheet when saving a document in PDF
format. If a file doesn’t have an intrinsic title, or if you set the title to be blank, EagleFiler 
will show
the filename (without the file extension) as the title. You can use Batch Change... to clear the 
titles
of many records at once if you want them all to be linked to their filenames. If you want to edit 
the
filename without changing the linked title, you can use the Change Filename, Keeping Title script.

From

The sender of a message, author of a document, or domain of a Web page.

To

The recipient of a message or document.

Date Modified

The date the record’s contents was modified. For a file, this is the file’s modification date. For a
message, this is when the message was sent.

Date Added

The date the record’s file was added to the library.

74


Date Created

The date the record’s file was created. For a message, this is when the message was sent.


Size
File
Kind

The amount of disk space used by the record.
The name of the file containing the record.

The type of the record.

Label

The Finder label color of the record’s file.

Container

The name of the folder or mailbox that the record is inside.

Tag Names

The full names of the assigned tags.

Source URL

The URL where the file was downloaded from.

Notes

The record’s note text.

•

Whether the record has the “unread” tag.

▷

Whether the record has the “flagged” tag.

Drag and drop the column headers to change their order. Click the  or Control-click on a column 
header
to choose which columns are visible.

You can type the first few letters of a record’s title to select it. Double-clicking a folder or 
mailbox in the list
opens it in the same window. Double-clicking a file is equivalent to choosing Open With External 
Viewer.
Option-double-clicking is equivalent to choosing Open Source URL. Press Enter (or Return) to rename 
the
selected      file or Option-Enter (or Option-Return) to change its title.

4.3  Record Viewer

The record viewer shows the contents of the selected file or e-mail message. Text, RTF, and RTFD 
files
can be edited directly in the viewer. EagleFiler automatically saves your changes to disk, and it 
supports
standard features such as spell-checking, find/replace, and text-to-speech.

EagleFiler knows how to display many different kinds of files. If it does not natively understand a 
file’s
format, EagleFiler uses Quick Look to display a preview of the file.

There is also a tags bar at the bottom of the viewer for assigning or unassigning the tags of the 
current item.

75


While the record viewer has focus, you can press Command-Delete to delete the current record(s).
Control-click on a selected word or phrase to set that phrase as the tag, filename, from, or title.

To hide and show the record viewer, you can use the Show ▷ Record Viewer command in the View menu or
drag or double-click the divider.

4.4  Searching

The search box lets you filter the records of the selected sources to display only those records 
that match
the search criteria. After finding the record you’re looking for, you can then search within it. 
Searches can
be initiated from within EagleFiler or from other applications such as Alfred and LaunchBar.

76


Search Scope

If Always Search All Records is checked, EagleFiler searches the entire library, regardless of 
which sources
are selected. It is as if you had selected the Records source before starting your search. This 
will include
or not include e-mail messages depending on whether Show ▷ Messages in Records Source is checked. 
When
the search is over, EagleFiler goes back to displaying only the records from the selected sources.

If Always Search All Records is unchecked, EagleFiler only searches the records from the selected 
sources:

• When you have the Records source selected, EagleFiler searches the entire library; this will 
include
or not include e-mail messages depending on whether Show ▷ Messages in Records Source is checked.

• When a folder or tag is selected, EagleFiler displays and searches only the contents of that 
folder or
the records with that tag. If Search Contained Folders/Mailboxes/Tags is checked, EagleFiler
searches all the folders and mailboxes inside the folder, or the subtags of the tag; otherwise, it 
searches
only the top level.

Indexed Searches

Indexed searches look for records that contain each word that you type. Words do not include spaces 
or
77


punctuation characters, and they are case- and diacritic-insensitive. Words do not have to appear 
in sequence
or even near each other.

There are two kinds of indexed searches:

Anywhere

Searches the contents of the records, as well as the Title, From, To, Cc, mail attachment names and
contents, and notes. Also searches for records whose tags exactly match the query.

Notes

Searches the notes of the records.

For more information about indexed searches, see the Search Query Syntax section. The How does 
indexing
in EagleFiler work? section has additional information about indexing options and troubleshooting.

Exact Searches

Exact searches look for the exact sequence of characters that you type, including partial words, 
spaces, and
punctuation. However, they are case- and diacritic-insensitive, so that searching for e will find 
by ´e and E.

There are five kinds of exact searches:

Filename

Searches the filenames as displayed in the records list.

From

Searches both the names and e-mail addresses.


Tags

Finds records that have the specified tag names. For more information, see the Search Query Syntax
section.

Any Recipient

Searches both the names and e-mail addresses in the To and Cc fields.

Any Address

Searches both the names and e-mail addresses in the From, To, and Cc fields.

Title

Searches record titles and message subjects.

Note: Searches for From and To/Cc are slow for e-mail messages stored as individual .eml files. If 
you
need to search lots of messages, it’s best to merge .eml files into mailboxes (or import in mailbox 
format in
the first place).

78


4.4.1 Search Query Syntax

As described in the Searching section of the manual, EagleFiler supports both indexed and exact 
searches.
This section explains the syntax for those search types in more detail. To perform even complex 
searches
with multiple criteria, you can use the New Smart Folder. . . command.

Indexed Searches

These support an enhanced query syntax:

&, AND

Boolean AND. The <space> character also represents a Boolean AND.


|, OR

!, -

(, )

"

Boolean inclusive OR.

Boolean NOT. For example, apple -orange finds records that contain apple and do not contain orange.
(There has to be at least one non-negated term in the query; you cannot do a search for just 
-orange.)

Opening and closing delimiters for logical grouping. For example, (apple AND orange) OR (apple
AND pear) finds records that contain apple and another fruit, but not ones that contain only apple.

Opening and closing delimiter for phrase-based searching. Phrase-based searches find records that
contain all of the words in sequence. Non-word characters inside the quotes are treated as word
separators and thus do not need to appear in the match.

*

Wildcard for prefix or suffix. Ignored in phrase-based searches. To search for a partial word, use 
two

*’s, e.g. *ant* will find ant, repellant, anthem, and words with ant in the middle. If Match Partial
Words is checked, EagleFiler will find partial word matches without your having to type the 
wildcards
each time.

Examples:

1. Searching for "IDP policy" "commit fails" finds records containing the two phrases IDP policy

and commit fails (since the space implies AND).

2. Searching for tech lead !"tech lead" finds records containing both tech and lead but not
those two words in sequence.

3. Searching for "ProductVersion 1.2" finds records containing the word ProductVersion fol-
lowed by the word 1 and then the word 2. This includes records containing ProductVersion

1 2 as well as ProductVersion=1.2, because the = and . are considered to be word separator
characters for indexed searches.

Tags Searches

79


If Match Partial Words is not selected, tag searching is exact, so you must type the complete tag 
names
(with the proper case). If the tag name contains a space, put it in double quotes. You can put - or 
! before
a tag name to find records that don’t have that tag. (Because those characters have special 
meaning, it’s
best not to use them in the names of your tags.)

Example: Searching for unread -flagged will find the records that are unread but not flagged.

Adding Tag Criteria to Exact and Indexed Searches

You can restrict any type of search to records with certain tags by adding tag:<tagname> at the 
beginning of
the query. (This syntax is not available in smart folders; there you should create a separate Tags 
criterion.)
If the tag name contains a space, put it in double quotes. The search will then match only the 
records with
all of those tags.

Examples:

1. Searching for tag:apple steve means to search for steve and show only the records with the

apple tag.

2. Searching for tag:-apple steve means to search for steve and show only the records without
the apple tag.

3. Searching for tag:mac tag:ipod halo !bungie means to find all the records that include the
word halo, do not include the word bungie, and have both the mac and ipod tags.

4. Searching for tag:"apple park" means to search for the tag apple park.

5. Searching for tag:apple park means to search for park and show only the records with the tag

apple.

6. Searching for tag:-"apple park" park means to search for park and show only records without
the tag apple park.

4.4.2 Searching Within Records

After you have used the main search field to find the records you are interested in, you can search 
within
them to find the relevant part of the document. EagleFiler automatically highlights the search term 
within
the currently selected document. You can use the Find ▷ Find. . . panel to jump from one occurrence 
to
the next. The Find panel is pre-filled with the current search term. You can jump between 
occurrences
without opening the Find panel by using the Find ▷ Find Next/Previous commands (Command-G and
Command-Shift-G). You can also select a new word within the document and set it as the Find panel’s
search      term using the Find ▷ Use Selection for Find command (Command-E).

4.4.3 Searching From Other Applications

You can quickly initiate an EagleFiler search while in another application by using the 
x-eaglefiler URL
scheme. When you open a URL of the form x-eaglefiler://search?q=query, EagleFiler brings itself to
the front, selects the Records source in the current library, and searches for query. You can also 
initiate
searches via AppleScript.

80


Alfred

To set up Alfred for searching EagleFiler:

1. In Alfred’s Settings window, click on Features, then Web Search.

2. Click the Add Custom Search button.

3. For the Search URL, enter x-eaglefiler://search?q={query}.

4. Set the Title to EagleFiler and the Keyword to something that you find convenient, for
example ef.

5. Click Save.

6. You can now search EagleFiler for the word apple by pressing Alfred’s hotkey and then typing

ef apple.

LaunchBar

To set up LaunchBar for searching EagleFiler:

1. From the Index menu, choose Show Index.

2. Click on Search Templates.

3. Click the + button at the center of the bottom of the window to create a new search template.

4. Set the Name to EagleFiler and the Template URL to x-eaglefiler://search?q=*.

5. You can now search EagleFiler for the word apple by pressing LaunchBar’s hotkey, searching for
the EagleFiler template, pressing the Spacebar, and then typing apple.

Specifying a Library

The above examples will search the current library that’s open in EagleFiler. You can also specify 
a library
in the URL scheme by path. EagleFiler will then open that library, if necessary, before performing 
the
search. For example, to search the library located at:

~/Documents/MyLibrary/MyLibrary.eflibrary

you would specify the Alfred search URL:

x-eaglefiler://search?q={query}&library=~/Documents/MyLibrary/MyLibrary.eflibrary

or the LaunchBar search template:

x-eaglefiler://search?q=*&library=~/Documents/MyLibrary/MyLibrary.eflibrary

Mac App Store

The feature to search EagleFiler from other applications is not available in the Mac App Store 
version of
EagleFiler.

81


5  Menus

5.1  The EagleFiler Menu

5.1.1 About EagleFiler

The About EagleFiler window shows the credits, as well as download and support information.
You can always download the latest version of EagleFiler from the EagleFiler Web site.

Questions about EagleFiler may be sent to eaglefiler@c-command.com⁴⁰. We’re always looking to 
improve
EagleFiler, so please feel free to send any feature requests to that address.

To make sure that you have the latest version of EagleFiler, you can use the Software Update... 
command.

5.1.2 Software Update...

Checking for Updates

Click the Check Now button, and EagleFiler will tell you whether a newer version is available for 
download.
By default, EagleFiler will automatically check for new versions each time it is launched and once 
per day.
You can disable this feature by unchecking the Check for updates automatically checkbox.

Updating

If a new version is available, EagleFiler will tell you what’s new in that version. Click Download 
to have
EagleFiler download the .dmg file for the new version to your downloads folder. Click Download & 
Install
to have it download the .dmg and then update the installed EagleFiler application to the new 
version. For
more information, please see Updating From a Previous Version.

Installing a Fresh Copy

You can hold down the Option key when you click Check Now to make EagleFiler always download the
latest version, even if your version is already up-to-date. This is an easy way to download and 
re-install a
fresh copy of EagleFiler if your copy is damaged.

Privacy

To check for a new version, EagleFiler contacts a Web server at c-command.com over a secure 
connection.
EagleFiler transmits the following information to the server: the name of the product (EagleFiler) 
and its
version, the version of macOS, the kind of Mac and processor, whether EagleFiler has been purchased,
whether it is running in dark mode, the values of certain esoteric preferences, and the name of the 
current
language. This information is used to guide future development. No personal information is 
transmitted.

Mac App Store

If you purchased DropDMG or EagleFiler via the Mac App Store, the Software Update... menu command
is not present, and updates are available via the App Store application.

⁴⁰mailto:eaglefiler@c-command.com

82


5.1.3 Purchase...

When you launch EagleFiler for the first time, the Purchase window will automatically open. You can 
also
open it by choosing Purchase... from the EagleFiler menu.

Trial/Demo Period

EagleFiler has a free trial. During the trial period, EagleFiler is fully functional; the only 
difference in
behavior is that it will periodically remind you that you are using the trial. To use EagleFiler in 
trial mode,
you can simply close the Purchase window.

The trial period lasts for 30 days. (After the 30 days, if you haven’t had a chance to use 
EagleFiler very
much, you can continue using it for up to a total of 7 launches.) To use EagleFiler beyond the 
trial period,
you must purchase it. This entitles you to free updates and support.

Purchasing

Click the Purchase Online button to enter the online store.

After Purchasing

Soon after paying, you’ll receive an e-mail with your serial number. Enter the name and serial 
number from
the e-mail into the Purchase window and click Personalize. You do not have to “install the purchased
version”; rather, EagleFiler will then know that you have purchased and you can keep using it as 
before—with
all   the preferences that you had set and data that you had entered.

Reinstalling a Previous Purchase

If you need to re-install EagleFiler, you can simply re-enter your Serial Name and Serial Number and
click Personalize; there’s no need to purchase again.

If you cannot find your serial number, click the Look Up My Serial Number button. This will open a
form where you can enter your e-mail address and look up your order information.

License Information

A license for EagleFiler is good for one person or one computer. This means that you can use it on 
your
desktop Mac and your laptop, or you and your family can use it (in separate user accounts) on a 
shared Mac.
If there are multiple users on multiple Macs, you should purchase multiple licenses. Discounts for 
packs of
2, 10, and 50 licenses are available above. A family (all living in the same household) can share a 
2-user
license. If you already have a single license, you can upgrade to a family license. To do this, 
e-mail your old
order number to sales@c-command.com⁴¹, and we’ll send you a coupon code.

Upgrade Policy

All maintenance releases (1.0.1, 1.0.2, 1.6.1, etc.) and minor feature updates (1.1, 1.2, 1.5, 
etc.) are free. We
have a track record of many such updates, and they have included significant new features. Major 
upgrades
(2.0, 3.0) are free if you purchased the previous version within the last six months. If you 
purchased longer
ago than that, you get a discount. (Note: The upgrade discounts are only available if you 
originally purchased
direct from C-Command, since the Mac App Store does not support upgrades.)

⁴¹mailto:sales@c-command.com

83


Mac App Store

The Purchase... menu command is not present if you purchased via the Mac App Store. In that case,
there is no trial period, and licensing is based on your iTunes account rather than the number of 
people or
computers.

5.1.4 Mac App Store

EagleFiler is available from the Mac App Store⁴² as well as direct from C-Command.

It’s Your Choice

We’re happy wherever you choose to purchase our software. The Mac App Store makes it very 
convenient to
buy, download, and install, and you get updates via the store. The purchase is tied to your iTunes 
account.
If you buy direct, you drag-and-drop to install and get updates via the application’s auto-updater 
or the
Web site. Either way, you can sign up for the EagleFiler News mailing list or the EagleFiler RSS 
feed to be
notified about new versions and important product news.

Prices

Pricing is substantially the same, although there will be slight differences due to Apple’s pricing 
tiers and
currency conversions. All Mac App Store purchases are for single-user licenses. Purchasing direct, 
you can
also buy family packs and get additional volume and educational discounts. Although you pay the same
price, Apple’s higher fees mean that direct purchases send 25+% more of your money to C-Command.

Trials

EagleFiler has a fully-featured 30-day trial version that’s available from the Web site. If you 
purchase direct,
you can click a link in your order confirmation to enter your serial number and take it out of 
trial mode. If
you purchase from the Mac App Store, you should first delete your trial version so that the store 
doesn’t
see EagleFiler as already installed. Your preferences and user data will be seamlessly shared 
between both
versions.

Updates and Upgrades

Our standard policy has been to provide customers lots of free minor updates and 50% discounts on 
major
upgrades. The Mac App Store does not support upgrade pricing, and Apple does not allow⁴³ upgrade 
pricing
for cross-grades out of the Mac App Store, so we can only offer the discount if you originally 
purchased direct
from C-Command.

Updates to EagleFiler will be available from the Mac App Store sometime after they are available 
direct
from C-Command. This delay is due to Apple’s review process, which has historically taken anywhere 
from
a few days to a few weeks. For example:

• Regular app review usually takes about a week.

• Mac OS X 10.9 introduced a bug⁴⁴ that could prevent apps downloaded from the store from being
signed (and, thus, launched). Therefore, we had to suspend submitting updates to Apple for several

⁴²http://www.apple.com/osx/apps/app-store.html

⁴³http://www.omnigroup.com/blog/entry/update-no-upgrade-pricing-for-mac-app-store-purchases
⁴⁴http://furbo.org/2013/10/17/code-signing-and-mavericks/

84


months in order to prevent customers from downloading updates that couldn’t be launched.

• In June 2015, there was a problem with Apple’s server that was causing it to reject the EagleFiler
archive that we uploaded, even though it was valid. It took a month for Apple to fix this.

• In October 2015, it took 61 days for Apple to review an update.

• In May 2016, two Apple server bugs prevented shipping a DropDMG update for about three months.
DropDMG had to be removed from sale, and previous purchasers could not download a working version
from the Mac App Store.

Once an updated version of EagleFiler is available, the Mac App Store does not let you download 
previous
versions. This can make it impossible to reinstall EagleFiler if you are using an older version of 
macOS than
the new version of EagleFiler supports. With the direct version of EagleFiler, you can always 
download
previous versions for use with prior OS versions.

Transfers

If you purchase via the Mac App Store, the direct version will recognize your receipt from Apple. 
So (barring
changes in the way Apple handles receipts) you’ll always have the option of downloading the 
software yourself
to  get the full features and the latest updates. Apple, unfortunately, provides no way to transfer 
purchases
in the other direction, for existing customers who would prefer to receive updates via the Mac App 
Store.

Feature Differences

We intend the Mac App Store and direct versions of EagleFiler to be as similar as possible, however 
some
differences are necessary in order to comply with the rules for Apple’s store. Our first priority 
is to design
the  direct version as best we know how; it should not be limited by Mac App Store considerations. 
Secondly,
if a feature cannot be accepted in the Mac App Store, we will try to adapt it or make it available 
in another
way. This may not always be possible or practical, however. Additionally, the Mac App Store rules 
are
subject to change, and so EagleFiler will change with them. If it becomes impossible to deliver 
EagleFiler
through the Mac App Store with the level of features and quality that we consider essential, we may 
remove
it  from the store and only sell it directly.

Here are the current differences between the Mac App Store and direct versions:

• The direct version automatically adds a Save PDF to EagleFiler command to each application’s

Print dialog. With the Mac App Store version, you can install the PDF service manually.

• The direct version uses OpenMeta⁴⁵ to share your recently used tags with other applications. The 
Mac
App Store version can read the list of recent tags but cannot update it.

• The Verify command in the direct version can fix file ownership problems. The Mac App Store 
version
cannot.

• It is likely that, in a future version, the Mac App Store version will not be able to create 
encrypted
libraries.

• The Mac App Store version cannot capture from Numbers or Microsoft PowerPoint.

• The Mac App Store version does not support double-clicking a smart folder to edit it.

• The Mac App Store version does not support Searching From Other Applications.

⁴⁵http://code.google.com/p/openmeta/

85


• The Mac App Store version does not support the Always Search All Records option, however you
can get the same behavior by clicking on the Records source before starting your search.

• The Mac App Store version does not support the Message ▷ Use Quick Look option.

5.2  The File Menu

5.2.1 New Library...

Creates a new library to hold a collection of records.  Although one EagleFiler library can hold 
many
files/documents from other applications, the library itself is treated as a single document from 
the perspective
of the EagleFiler application. For example:

• Since most EagleFiler operations target a particular library, EagleFiler itself won’t do much 
until you
have either created a new library or opened an existing one. You can double-click the .eflibrary 
file
to open an existing library in EagleFiler.

• You can create multiple libraries and have more than one open at a time.

• Each open library has one or more windows in EagleFiler. Closing all of a library’s windows closes
the library so that it is no longer accessible in EagleFiler. You can re-open a library by opening 
its

.eflibrary file or by using the Open Library. . . or Open Recent command in the File menu.

• To make EagleFiler automatically open certain libraries, see the Remember open libraries between
launches preference.

• You can move the library folder around in the Finder, so long as it isn’t currently open in 
EagleFiler.

Splitting Libraries

EagleFiler is designed to support multi-gigabyte libraries with many thousands of files. Thus, it 
is usually
not necessary to split up a large library for performance reasons. However, sometimes people find 
after using
EagleFiler for a while that it makes sense to split one library into two for organizational 
reasons. To do this,
make   a folder in your library, and move into it all the folders and files that you want to move 
to the second
library. Create the second library and drag the folder from the first library onto the Records icon 
in the
second library’s source list. After the import has completed, you can then delete the folder from 
the first
library.

Merging Libraries

To combine two libraries, first open both of them in EagleFiler. Drag the Records icon from one 
library’s
source list onto the Records icon in the other library’s source list. This will import the entire 
contents of
the library, including all of the metadata.

See Also

• How can I encrypt my files?

• How can I access my library from multiple Macs?

86


5.2.2 New Record ▷ Rich Text File

Creates a new, empty RTF or RTFD file inside the selected source.

If the File column is visible, EagleFiler brings the filename into edit mode so that you can set 
the name of
the newly created file. When you’re done, press Tab or Return, or click in the viewer to begin 
entering the
contents of the file.

If the File column is hidden, EagleFiler opens a sheet that lets you enter the name of the new 
file.

5.2.3  New Record ▷ Plain Text File

Creates a new, empty plain text (UTF-8) file inside the selected source. Plain text files are 
easier to edit on
iOS devices.

If the File column is visible, EagleFiler brings the filename into edit mode so that you can set 
the name of
the newly created file. When you’re done, press Tab or Return, or click in the viewer to begin 
entering the
contents of the file.

If the File column is hidden, EagleFiler opens a sheet that lets you enter the name of the new 
file.

If you enter a name containing an extension, EagleFiler uses that; otherwise, it adds .txt as the 
file extension.

5.2.4  New Record ▷ From Clipboard

Creates a new RTF, RTFD, or PNG file inside the selected source. The content of the file is taken 
from the
clipboard. In a way, you are creating a new file in EagleFiler by “pasting,” and the keyboard 
shortcut of
Command-Shift-V reflects this.

You can use the PrefersRichText esoteric preference to set EagleFiler to create plain text files 
instead.

5.2.5  New Record ▷ Open Stationery Folder

EagleFiler has built-in support for creating new plain text and RTF files. The stationery feature 
lets you
create other types of new files from within EagleFiler. Additionally, your stationary items do not 
have to be
empty documents; they can be templates with some text, images, or formatting already added. For 
example,
some possible stationary items are:

• A Microsoft Word file or OmniOutliner file with your favorite styles already set up.

• An RTF template for letters, with your return address and spaces to enter the destination address 
and
date.

• A form with labeled fields and empty spaces to fill in.

• A text file for a daily journal entry, with the filename automatically set to the current date.

87


Adding Stationery Items

Choose Open Stationery Folder to have EagleFiler open the Stationery folder in the Finder. Whichever
files you put in the Stationery folder become available in the File ▷ New Record menu and in the 
toolbar.
You can also put whole folder hierarchies in the Stationery folder, e.g. if you often need to 
create subfolders
with a particular structure.

Keyboard Shortcuts

You can assign keyboard shortcuts for your stationery items from the Keyboard pane in System 
Settings.
Click on Application Shortcuts and then click the + button to add your own shortcut.

Setting Stationery Metadata

You can edit the stationery file in the Finder in order to control the metadata that EagleFiler 
assigns when
creating a new record from the stationery. For example, you can assign a label or add Spotlight 
comments.
The new record will have the same label as the stationery file, and the Spotlight comments will 
control the
tags and notes.

For example, to set the tags to “journal” and “draft” and the note to “This is the note.”, set the 
Spotlight
comments to:

&journal &draft This is a note.

The Writing Stationery Scripts section describes how you can use AppleScript to create even more 
powerful
stationery items.

5.2.6 New Folder...

Creates a new folder in the source list of the current library. You can set a custom icon for the 
folder by
selecting it in the Finder, choosing File ▷ Get Info, clicking on the icon, and pasting your own 
image.

If a smart folder is selected, creates a folder for holding smart folders rather than a folder for 
holding files.

5.2.7 New Tag

Creates a new tag and selects it in the source list. If records are selected, they are assigned the 
new tag. If
a tag is selected, the new tag becomes a subtag of that tag. You can drag and drop tags to 
re-arrange their
hierarchy.

5.2.8 New Browser Window

Creates an additional browser window for viewing the contents of the current library. To instead 
create a
new window tab, see the New Tab command.

88


5.2.9 New Tab

Creates an additional browser window tab for viewing the contents of the current library.

You can equivalently click the + button in the tab bar. For more information, see the Show Tab Bar 
section.
This command requires macOS 10.12 or later.

5.2.10 New Smart Folder...

A smart folder is like a saved search; it shows shows records in the library that match certain 
criteria. Ea-
gleFiler has four built-in smart folders: Recently Added, Recently Modified, Unfiled, and Untagged.
This command lets you create your own smart folders.

You can organize smart folders into folders. To do this, select a smart folder and choose New 
Folder. . ..
Then re-arrange the smart folders using drag and drop.

5.2.11 Edit Smart Folder...

The Conditions Tab

The Conditions tab lets you set the criteria that determine which records are shown in the smart
folder.

89


Search Scope

Search inside

This pop-up menu lets you select a folder, a mailbox, or the entire library to determine which
records the smart folder can display.

subfolders

If this is checked, EagleFiler searches the entire contents of the folder or library.  If it’s
unchecked, it only searches the first level of files in the folder.

mailboxes

If this is checked, when EagleFiler encounters a mailbox it searches the messages inside of it.
If you don’t need to search the messages, unchecking this will make the search go faster.

Adding and Removing Criteria

Now that you’ve chosen which records EagleFiler will search, you can create an unlimited number
of criteria to narrow down the results. Click + to add a criterion or - to remove one. You can
drag and drop to re-arrange the criteria.

Nested Criteria

Option-click + to add a new Any/All/None grouping of criteria (i.e. for nested Boolean condi-
tions).

The Available Criteria
Anywhere

Searches the contents of the records, as well as the Title, From, To, Cc, attachment names, and
notes (but not tags). There are separate options for matches (whole words) and matches
(partial words). The detailed search options are described in the Searching section.

90


From

The names and e-mail addresses.

Any Recipient

The names and e-mail addresses of the To and Cc fields.

Title

Record titles and message subjects.

Count

The number of pages in a PDF, messages in a mailbox, or attachments in a message.

Source URL

The URL that a record was downloaded from.

Label

The Finder label of the record’s file.

Notes

The notes, set in the Info inspector. There are separate options for matches (whole words)
and matches (partial words). The detailed search options are described in the Searching
section.

Tags

The full names of the assigned tags.

Filename

Searches the filenames as displayed in the records list.

Size

The amount of disk space used by the record.

Kind

The type of the record, as shown in the records list.

Container name

The name of the folder or mailbox that the record is inside.

Date added

The date the record was added to the library.

Date created

The date the record’s file was created.

Date modified

The date the record’s contents was modified. For a file, this is the file’s modification date.
For a message, this is when the message was received.

Every record

This is useful when combined with subfolders and mailboxes. When you click on a folder
in the source list, EagleFiler shows only the immediate contents of the folder. If you create a
smart folder using Every record, EagleFiler will show the contents of the folder and of its
subfolders.

Matching Text

Text criteria such as From and Title support matching by contains, begins with, ends with,
is, and matches regex. Regular expression matches can be used to prevent matching partial
words. For example, if you want to find chase but not purchase, you could search for \bchase\b
(where \b matches word boundaries).

The Actions Tab

The Actions tab lets you control what happens when you drag a record onto the smart folder or create
a new file while the smart folder is selected. Actions can add tags, remove tags, set the label, or 
move
the records to a folder.

91


Note: As a shortcut for the menu command, you can double-click a smart folder to edit it.

5.2.12 Open Library...

Opens a .eflibrary file, letting you view the library in EagleFiler.

To open an encrypted library, first double-click its .sparsebundle or .sparseimage file in the 
Finder and
enter your passphrase. Then you will be able to see the .eflibrary file and open it in EagleFiler. 
For quick
access, you can also drag the .eflibrary file to the Dock or create an alias.

See also: Remember open libraries between launches.

If a Library Won’t Open

There may be additional information about why the library won’t open in the system Console. Please 
see
the Sending in an Error Report section. You can also rebuild/restore a library that won’t open, as 
described
in the How can I rebuild a library? section.

Rebuilding a Library’s Indexes

To rebuild a library’s indexes, hold down the Command and Option keys when opening the library. For
more information, see the How does indexing in EagleFiler work? section.

92


Skipping Initial Operations

When you open a library, EagleFiler will automatically verify that all of the files are present, 
backup the
metadata, copy the tags to OpenMeta, and copy the tags to the Spotlight comments (if you’ve 
selected that
option). To skip these operations, hold down the Shift key when opening the library.

5.2.13 Close & Lock

Closes an encrypted library and ejects its disk image. Accessing the library again will require its 
passphrase.

5.2.14 Scan for New Files

An easy way to add new files to your EagleFiler library is to save new files (or move existing 
files) directly
into the Files folder in the library folder. When EagleFiler scans the library folder, it will 
import the new
files in-place (without copying them) and assign tags and notes based on the Spotlight comments and 
Finder
tags. When importing in this manner, EagleFiler does not skip duplicate files; any file that you 
specifically
add to the library folder will stay there.

EagleFiler scans the Files folder for new files when you open the library. In this way, files added 
since
the last session will be auto-imported. Unlike with the To Import folder, EagleFiler does not 
automatically
scan the Files folder for new files once the library is open. This is to prevent accidentally 
importing files
(or packages) that are in the midst of being saved, which could lead to duplicate files or data 
corruption.
Instead, you can manually trigger a scan at an opportune time (i.e. when you are not in the midst 
of copying
or saving new files) by choosing Scan for New Files from the File menu or by invoking that command 
via
AppleScript.

Preventing Folders From Being Scanned

There may be cases where you want to prevent certain files from being auto-imported by a scan. To 
hide
the contents of a folder from EagleFiler, assign it the ef unscanned tag. This will let you store 
files in that
folder in the Finder, without having EagleFiler detect them, import them, and clutter up its 
window.

Preventing Files From Being Scanned

You can use the UnscannedExtensions default to make the scan ignore files and folders of certain 
types
inside of an already-imported folder. For example, to prevent EagleFiler’s scan from picking up 
temporary
files generated by LaTeX (.aux, .out, .toc), you could type this command into Terminal:

defaults write com.c-command.EagleFiler UnscannedExtensions -array aux out toc

You can also use the UnscannedFilenames default to make the scan ignore files and folders with a 
certain
name inside of an already-imported folder. For example, to prevent EagleFiler’s scan from picking 
up ctags⁴⁶
files named tags, you could type this command into Terminal:

defaults write com.c-command.EagleFiler UnscannedFilenames -array ’tags’

⁴⁶http://ctags.sourceforge.net

93


For both of these defaults, changes take effect for new files imported after you relaunch 
EagleFiler. (There is
no need to restart your Mac.) Each invocation of the command overwrites the previous one, so, for 
example,
to set multiple extensions as unscanned they should all be listed in a single command.

Disabling Scans

You can disable automatic scans using the ScanForNewFilesOnOpen esoteric preference.

5.2.15  Import Files. . .

Opens a sheet that lets you choose one or more files or folders to be imported into the current 
library.

5.2.16 Import URLs...

Opens a sheet for importing one or more URLs into the current library, using the Web page format 
chosen
in the settings. The text field will be pre-filled with the contents of the clipboard.

You can enter multiple URLs, one per line.

If you enter a URL that’s not for a Web page (e.g. the URL of a PDF or image file) EagleFiler 
imports the
file directly rather than converting it to a Web archive, PDF, etc.

To import URLs from your browser’s bookmarks, you should instead use the Import Bookmarks... 
command.
See also the Importing Web Pages and URLs page.

5.2.17 Import Bookmarks...

EagleFiler can import Netscape-format HTML bookmarks files from the following products:

Delicious

Go to Settings and then Export / Backup Bookmarks.

Instapaper

Go to Settings an then Export / Download .HTML file.

Pinboard

Go to Pinboard’s export page⁴⁷ and choose the option to export as HTML. Choose a filename that
ends with .html.

Pocket

Go to Manage account ▷ Export and click Export HTML file.

Safari

Choose Export Bookmarks... from the File menu.

⁴⁷http://pinboard.in/export/

94


The URLs will be imported using the chosen Web page format. EagleFiler will preserve the tags, 
titles, and
descriptions that you’ve set, as well as the original bookmarking date.

If Skip URLs that are already in the library is checked, EagleFiler will not import a URL if there 
is
already a (non-trashed) file in the library with the same source URL (even if file format is 
different). This
setting does not affect duplicate URLs within the bookmarks file.

To automatically import new URLs from Instapaper and other services that provide RSS feeds, see the
Import From Instapaper via NetNewsWire script.

5.2.18  Import ENEX File. . .

There are two ways to import from Evernote to EagleFiler:

• You can select some notes in the Evernote window and then press EagleFiler’s capture key. (This
works with older versions of Evernote, as Evernote 10 no longer supports AppleScript.)

• The Import ENEX File. . . command in the File menu lets you import notes previously exported
from Evernote into a .enex file. (You can optionally use the Evernote Bulk Export script to export 
all
your Evernote notes, creating a separate .enex file for each notebook.)

Either way, when importing from Evernote, EagleFiler converts the Evernote Markup Language⁴⁸ to ma-
cOS’s standard Rich Text With Attachments (RTFD) format. EagleFiler preserves the rich text 
formatting,
embedded images and other attached files, tags, source URLs, to-do list checkboxes, note titles and 
authors,
and creation and modification dates. Any Optical Character Recognition (OCR) results are attached to
the records as EagleFiler notes, so that you can search for printed and handwritten text that 
Evernote had
extracted.

Importing preserves the fonts that you’ve chosen in Evernote. Text in a note that does not have a 
font
specified will be imported using the rich text font set in EagleFiler’s Fonts settings.

Any encrypted text within a note will remain in the <en-crypt> format; if you want to store it 
unencrypted
in EagleFiler, you should decrypt it with Evernote before importing.

Evernote notes that contain only a single attached file are imported into EagleFiler as just that 
file, as that’s
more useful than embedding the file inside an otherwise empty RTFD document.

To preserve which Evernote notebook each note came from, it’s easiest to import using the capture 
key
rather than by exporting a .enex file (since the .enex format does not store the structure). For 
example,
to import everything at once you could click on All Notes and choose Edit ▷ Select All. Then, when 
you
press the capture key, EagleFiler will import each note into an EagleFiler folder named after its 
Evernote
notebook. Alternatively, you can export each notebook to a separate .enex file and then import the 
files in
EagleFiler. The Import ENEX File. . . command lets you select multiple .enex files at a time.

To preserve the exact HTML formatting of an Evernote note, rather than converting to rich text 
format, you
can choose File ▷ Export Note... in Evernote and choose HTML as the format. (Note: This feature was
removed in Evernote 10.) HTML files are not directly editable in EagleFiler, but you can use the 
Convert
for Editing command to convert them to RTF at a later date.

⁴⁸http://dev.evernote.com/doc/articles/enml.php

95


5.2.19 Import from iPhone Camera

The Import from iPhone or iPad command in the File menu uses Continuity Camera to allow direct
importing from your iOS device into EagleFiler:

• Choose Take Photo to take a picture with the camera and add it to your EagleFiler library as a
JPEG file.

• Choose Scan Documents to use your camera to scan a multi-page document and add it to your
EagleFiler library as a PDF file.

• Choose Add Sketch to draw on your iPhone or iPad’s screen and then import the sketch to your
EagleFiler library as a PNG file.

You can also import from your iPhone to create attachments within a rich text file (instead of 
separate files,
as above). To do this, Control-click within the rich text file in the record viewer and choose 
Insert from
iPhone or iPad.

Continuity Camera requires an iPhone with iOS 12 or later and a Mac with macOS 10.14 or later, 
amongst
other requirements.

5.2.20 Export...

Opens a sheet that lets you choose a folder to which the selected records will be exported.

• The selected files/folders will be copied into the folder.

• Individual selected e-mail messages will be exported as a single mailbox file. To access the 
messages,
import them into a mail program or EagleFiler.

Please note that, because the library is open, it is not necessary to export files in order to open 
them with
other applications. You could instead use the Open With External Viewer or Reveal In Finder 
commands.
The Export... command is intended for when you want to make copies of the selected files or when the
selected records are scattered throughout the library so that they would not be easy to access from 
the
Finder.

Importing EagleFiler Mailboxes Into Other Mail Clients

EagleFiler natively stores e-mail as mailbox files using the standard mbox format. All Mac e-mail 
programs
can import files in this format. So, usually, it’s not necessary to export mail from EagleFiler 
before importing
it into another app. Here are specific instructions for some common e-mail programs:

Apple Mail

Choose File ▷ Import Mailboxes..., select the mbox files radio button, click Continue, and then
choose the folder containing the exported mailbox file.

For messages stored as individual .eml files, you can simply double-click the file to open it in 
Apple
Mail. Once open, you can use the Message ▷ Copy Message menu command to copy it into a
mailbox in Mail’s data store.

96


Outlook 2016

This version of Outlook does not support importing mail in standard formats. However, you can import
the messages into Apple Mail (above) and then use it to copy them into server mailbox, which would
then sync automatically to Outlook.

Outlook 2011 and Entourage

Choose File ▷ Import..., select the Contacts or messages from a text file radio button, then
click the right arrow. Select the Import messages from an MBOX-format text file radio button
and click the right arrow. Select the file and then click the Import button.

Thunderbird

Install the ImportExportTools NG extension and then use the Import mbox file command.

Windows Mail Clients

To read mbox files on Windows, make sure that you import the files rather than trying to open them
by double-clicking. The Windows versions of Eudora and Thunderbird (as well as many other mail
programs) can import mbox files.

Exporting Mail Before Importing

If you’re unable to directly import a mailbox file that’s stored in EagleFiler, it may help to 
select the messages
and export them as a new mailbox file. This is for two reasons:

1. EagleFiler stores the messages exactly as you imported them, and some mail programs are not
very tolerate of format differences. When you export, EagleFiler tries to convert the messages to
as standard a format as possible, and this can lead to more successful imports.

2. Entourage and Outlook will only let you select a file for importing if it has type code TEXT. 
Most
mailbox files do not have a type code, however EagleFiler will set the type code when you ask it
to create a new mailbox using the Export... command.

Exporting Mail to PDF

To save a message in PDF format, double-click it in EagleFiler to open it in Apple Mail. Then 
choose File

▷ Export as PDF....

5.2.21 Backup Metadata

Metadata is EagleFiler-specific information such a record’s title, from, checksum, source URL, 
tags, and
notes. It is stored inside the .eflibrary file.

EagleFiler will automatically backup a library’s metadata when it’s opened and also periodically 
thereafter.
You can manually backup the metadata by holding down the Option key and choosing Backup Metadata
from the File menu or by using the backup metadata AppleScript command.

Metadata is backed up to invisible XML .EagleFiler Metadata.plist files inside the library folder. 
These
are standard macOS property lists that can be viewed in TextEdit and processed by many other 
programs.

The backups allow EagleFiler to reconstruct all of your metadata if the .eflibrary file is damaged 
or
deleted.

97


To restore from a library’s metadata backup, please see the How can I rebuild a library? section.

Excluding Folders From Metadata Backups

If you don’t want EagleFiler to try to make a metadata backup for a certain folder, e.g. because 
you don’t
have write access to it, you can assign it the ef nometa tag.

Metadata Files Visible in the Library

The metadata .plist files should be invisible in the Finder and not appear as records in 
EagleFiler. However,
opening a newer EagleFiler library using an older (pre-1.6.7) version of EagleFiler can cause the 
.plist files
to  be imported. This is undesirable because it crowds the records list and will cause checksum 
errors if you
ask EagleFiler to verify the files. To fix this:

1. Make sure that EagleFiler is updated to version 1.6.7 or later on all your Macs.

2. Open the library and click on the Records source.

3. Do a Filename search for .EagleFiler Metadata.plist and delete all the matching files.

4. The next time it does a metadata backup, EagleFiler will create new .plist files, and they will
not appear in the records list.

5.2.22 Empty Trash...

Empties the trash of the current library, permanently deleting any files that you had moved to the 
Trash
folder. Hold down the Option key to skip the warning. You can also empty the trash by pressing the 
Delete
key while Trash is selected in the source list.

5.2.23 Print

By default, EagleFiler prints the contents of the record viewer. If the source list or records list 
has focus,
and you hold down the Option key, EagleFiler will instead print the list.

5.3  The Edit Menu

5.3.1 Undo/Redo

Most actions in EagleFiler can be undone and redone, and EagleFiler supports multiple levels of 
undo. When
you close a library or empty the trash, EagleFiler clears the list of undoable actions for that 
library.

5.3.2 Copy

Copies the selected text, the titles of the selected records or sources, or the names of the 
selected tags.
See also: Copy Source URL, Copy Record Link, Copy Filename, and Copy File Path.

98


5.3.3 Copy Source URL

Copies to the clipboard the original http URLs for files that were imported from Web pages.

5.3.4 Copy Record Link

Copies a x-eaglefiler URL to the clipboard for each selected record. You can then paste the link 
into an
EagleFiler note or into another application. Opening the URL will launch EagleFiler, open the 
library, and
select the record so that its contents are shown in the source list or viewer.

To open a URL in a rich text view, just click the blue, underlined link. To open a URL in a plain 
text view,
select the link, Control-click, and choose Open URL from the contextual menu.

Links will continue to work as you re-arrange the files within the library. However, if you move 
the library
folder or rename the .eflibrary file in the Finder, previously copied x-eaglefiler URLs for that 
library
will break. Links to individual e-mail messages will break if you merge the message’s mailbox with 
another
mailbox, as that will delete the original mailbox.

Another way to use record links is to select some records in EagleFiler and choose a command from 
the
Services menu, e.g.  Text Edit ▷ New Window Containing Selection or OmniFocus:  Send to
Inbox. This will send the record links to that application without your having to copy and paste.

See also the Copy File URL script.

5.3.5 Paste/Paste and Match Style

Regular Paste preserves the font and style information from the copied text. This means that the 
pasted
text may not fit in with its surroundings.

Paste and Match Style is like converting the clipboard to plain text before pasting. Any formatting 
is
removed. The pasted text will blend in with the surrounding text.

5.3.6  Find ▷ Library Search...

Brings the focus to the search field in the current browser window so that you can search the 
library for
the records that are of interest. This is described in the Searching section. After searching, the 
query is
automatically entered into the Find panel so that you can search within the current record, e.g. 
using Find

▷ Find Next/Previous.

5.3.7 Find ▷ Find...

Opens the Find panel so that you can find (or replace) text within the current record. You can hold 
down
the Option key when clicking the Replace All button to make it only replace within the selection.

99


5.3.8  Find ▷ Find Next/Previous

If the query has already been set (using Find ▷ Find. . . or Find ▷ Use Selection for Find), jumps 
to the next
(or previous) occurrence within the current record.

5.3.9  Find ▷ Use Selection for Find

A shortcut for entering the selected text into the Find panel. This, combined with Find ▷ Find 
Next/Previous,
makes it possible to search within a record without having to open the Find panel.

5.3.10 Spelling and Grammar

This submenu lets you check the spelling and grammar⁴⁹, turn automatic checking on/off, and turn 
automatic
spelling correction on/off.

5.3.11 Substitutions

This submenu lets you control whether EagleFiler uses smart copy/paste⁵⁰, smart quotes⁵¹, smart 
dashes⁵²,
smart links⁵³, data detectors⁵⁴, and automatic text replacement⁵⁵.

5.3.12 Transformations

This submenu contains commands⁵⁶ for making the selected text lowercase, uppercase, or capitalized.

5.4  The View Menu

5.4.1 Show Tab Bar

EagleFiler supports tabbed windows. A single window can have multiple tabs for either a single 
library or
for different libraries.

• The View ▷ Show Tab Bar menu item lets you hide and show the tab bar.

• The Window menu contains the following items to manipulate tabs: Show Previous Tab, Show
Next Tab, Move Tab to New Window, and Merge All Windows. You can also move tabs
between windows using drag and drop.

⁴⁹http://support.apple.com/kb/ph10844
⁵⁰http://support.apple.com/kb/PH10620
⁵¹http://support.apple.com/kb/PH4513
⁵²http://support.apple.com/kb/PH4820
⁵³http://support.apple.com/kb/PH11346
⁵⁴http://support.apple.com/kb/PH11351
⁵⁵http://support.apple.com/kb/PH11347
⁵⁶http://support.apple.com/kb/PH11348

100


• Clicking the + button in the tab bar creates a new tab for the current library, equivalent to the 
New
Tab command in the File menu.

• To create a new window (not in a tab) for the current library, use the New Browser Window command
in the File menu.

• You can control whether new windows are created as tabs or as separate windows from the Dock
pane of System Settings. The Prefer tabs when opening documents setting has three options:
Always, In Full Screen Only, and Manually. You can hold down the Option key to reverse the
current setting. For example, if you have it set to Manually (preferring separate windows), you can
hold down Option when opening a library to have it open in a tab instead.

The window tabs feature requires macOS 10.12 or later.

5.4.2 Show All Tabs

This command shows thumbnails of all of the window’s tabs so that you can easily pick one to switch 
to.
For more information about tabs, see the Show Tab Bar section.

Show All Tabs requires macOS 10.13 or later.

5.4.3  Message ▷ Raw Source

If this is checked, the viewer will show the raw RFC-822⁵⁷ source for e-mail messages. The font 
will always
be the Plain text font specified in the Fonts settings.

If this is unchecked, messages will be displayed according to which one of Message ▷ Plain Text, 
Mes-
sage ▷ Rich Text, and Message ▷ Use Quick Look is checked.

5.4.4  Message ▷ Plain Text

If this is checked, EagleFiler will show all e-mail messages in plain text format. For HTML-only 
messages,
a plain text representation will be created. The font will always be the Plain text font specified 
in the
Fonts settings, and no images will be shown. Levels of quoting will be indicated using angle 
brackets and
the chosen Quoted Text Colors.

See also: Message ▷ Rich Text and Message ▷ Use Quick Look.

5.4.5  Message ▷ Rich Text

If this is checked, EagleFiler will show rich text (i.e. HTML) representations of e-mail messages 
where
available. The font will be the Rich text font specified in the Fonts settings. Levels of quoting 
will be
indicated using the chosen Quoted Text Colors. Remote images will be displayed; attached images 
will not
be.

⁵⁷http://www.ietf.org/rfc/rfc0822.txt

101


See also: Message ▷ Plain Text and Message ▷ Use Quick Look.

5.4.6  Message ▷ Use Quick Look

If this is checked, EagleFiler will use Quick Look rather than its own e-mail engine to display 
messages in
the record viewer.

The advantages of EagleFiler’s engine are that it is faster, it lets you control the fonts and 
colors, you can
select and copy text, search matches are highlighted, and you can use the Find panel.

The advantages of the Quick Look engine are that it can display images that are attached to the 
message
(both engines can display remote images that are referenced by URL) and in some cases it has better 
HTML
rendering. A future version of EagleFiler’s engine will incorporate these features so that it’s not 
necessary
to   use Quick Look.

See also: Message ▷ Plain Text and Message ▷ Rich Text, the Importing Mail section.

The Use Quick Look option is not available in the Mac App Store version of EagleFiler.

5.4.7  PDF ▷ Next/Previous Page

These commands let you control which page of a PDF is displayed in the record viewer. There are 
several
ways to change the page without using the menu bar:

• Click on the PDF page, so that it gets keyboard focus, and then press the Down or Up arrow key. In
order for this to work, View ▷ Zooming ▷ Zoom to Fit must be checked.

• Press Command–Left Arrow or Command–Right Arrow.

• Control-click on the PDF page and use the commands in the contextual menu.

• Use the View ▷ Customize Toolbar command to add Next and Previous toolbar buttons for
changing the page.

• Use the Keyboard pane of System Settings to change the keyboard shortcuts for Next Page and

Previous Page.

5.4.8  Show ▷ Source List

Hides or shows the source list.

5.4.9  Show ▷ Record Viewer

Hides or shows the record viewer.

102


5.4.10  Show ▷ Deleted Messages

E-mail messages that you’ve deleted are still stored in their mailbox files, but they are hidden 
from view.
This option in the View menu lets you see all of the messages, even the deleted ones. To undelete a 
message,
select it and press Delete.

There are two ways to compact a mailbox to remove the deleted messages:

1. Select all the (non-deleted) messages in the mailbox, choose Export..., import the newly created
mailbox file, and delete the original. (This way is faster but does not preserve the tags and notes
on  the messages.)

2. Make a folder, move the non-deleted messages to the folder, select them in the folder and choose
Merge Message Files, and delete the original mailbox.

5.4.11  Show ▷ Messages in Records Source

If this is checked in the View menu, EagleFiler will show e-mail messages (from all your mailboxes) 
as well
as files in the Records source. Uncheck it if you want to avoid the clutter of seeing all the 
e-mail messages,
or if viewing the library is slow because you have lots of messages. This setting is saved 
per-library.

5.4.12  Show ▷ Messages in Tag Sources

If this is checked in the View menu, EagleFiler will show e-mail messages (from all your mailboxes) 
as well
as files in tag sources. Uncheck it if you want to avoid the clutter of seeing all the e-mail 
messages, or if
viewing tag sources is slow because you have lots of messages. This setting is saved per-library.

5.4.13 Allow Editing in Record Viewer

This controls whether Text, RTF, and RTFD records can be edited directly in the record viewer, 
without
opening the file in another application. You might uncheck this if you want to avoid making 
accidental
changes while viewing a record.

5.4.14 Open in New Window

This opens a new browser window in EagleFiler and selects the current record. If more than one 
record is
selected, EagleFiler opens one window per record.

A shortcut for this command is to double-click an item in the source list.

5.4.15 Enter Full Screen

This makes the browser window take over the whole screen. You can still bring up the info and tag 
inspectors
if desired.

103


5.5  The Go Menu

The commands at the bottom of this menu let you quickly jump to key items in the source list: 
Records,
Recently Added, Recently Modified, Unfiled, Untagged, flagged, and unread.

5.5.1 Enclosing Record

View the container of the current folder or mailbox (i.e. go up a level in the hierarchy). For 
example, if you
have a file selected in the records list, this will select the file’s folder in the records list. 
If you have a folder
selected in the source list, this will select the containing folder in the source list.

5.5.2 Contents of Record

View the contents of the selected folder or mailbox (i.e. go down a level in the hierarchy). For 
example, if
the Records source is selected, you can use the search box to enter the name of the folder or 
mailbox that
you want to view, select it in the record list, and then choose Contents of Record. This is often 
quicker
than expanding the various folders inside the Records source to find the one you want.

If a message or non-mailbox file is selected, Contents of Record will instead say Reveal in 
Container,
and it will select the containing mailbox or folder in the source list and select the message or 
file in the
records list. This lets you search for a message or file in Records, a tag source, or a smart 
folder, and then
reveal it in its original context.

5.5.3 Previous/Next Record

These commands select the previous or next record in the record list. This lets you change which 
record is
being viewed while the viewer pane has keyboard focus.

When the records list or the record viewer has keyboard focus, you can type Spacebar or 
Shift-Spacebar to
select the next or previous record.

5.6  The Record Menu

5.6.1 Mark as Unread/Read

Add (or remove) the “unread” tag to the selected records.

5.6.2 Mark as Flagged/Unflagged

Add (or remove) the “flagged” tag to the selected records.

104


5.6.3 Tag

Gives keyboard focus to the tags text field at the bottom of the browser window, which lets you 
edit the
tags of the selected record. You can enter multiple tags by pressing Return or Comma.

5.6.4 Edit Notes

Opens the Info inspector and places the insertion point in the Notes field.

5.6.5 Set Label

The Set Label command lets you set the colored label of the selected records. Each file can have 
one of 7
possible label colors, or none at all. The label is shown as the background color in the records 
list and also
in the Label column.

EagleFiler stores labels in the standard Mac filesystem metadata, so that they are available in the 
Finder
and in other applications. Some cloud syncing software does not support this metadata and so will 
not
preserve labels.

The Importing Mail section describes how e-mail messages in EagleFiler may be stored as individual 
files
or in mailbox files. With mailbox files, multiple messages are stored in a single mailbox file. 
Thus, there
can only be one filesystem label for the mailbox and all messages in the mailbox will show the same 
label in
EagleFiler.

To have separate colors for messages that are stored in mailboxes, you can use tags instead of 
labels. Tags
can be displayed in the records list as colored names or colored abbreviation symbols. For more 
information,
see the Show Tags section.

On macOS 10.8 and earlier, the label names are editable in the Finder’s Settings window. On macOS 
10.9
and later, the label names are always the system color names.

5.6.6 Move To

Moves the selected records to another folder.

5.6.7 Batch Change...

This window lets you set the title, from name, label, tags, and notes of multiple selected records 
at once.
You can either Append or Replace. For example, appending tag mac will add that tag to the selected
records, while Replace would add the mac tag and remove any pre-existing tags.

105


There are keyboard shortcuts for Append (Shift-Command-A), Replace (Shift-Command-R), Label 
(Command-
3), Cancel (Command-. or Escape), and OK (Enter or Command-Return).

You can change all the titles to match the filenames by using Replace and setting the title to be 
blank.

Scripts

There are also a variety of batch operations than can be performed via AppleScript:

• Add Filename Prefix/Suffix

• Change Filename, Keeping Title

• Change Title to Title Case

• Filename to Title

• Replace in Filenames

• Replace in Filenames (Regex)

• Title to Filename

106


5.6.8 Convert for Editing

Converts the selected Web archives or HTML files to (editable) rich text files, preserving the 
tags, notes,
source URL, and other metadata.

The ImportTextAsWebArchive esoteric preference can be used to make selected Web text always import 
in
rich text rather than Web archive format, so that it’s not necessary to convert for editing.

5.6.9 Verify

When you open a library, EagleFiler checks that all the files and notes are present. The Verify 
command
does this, and it additionally checks that their contents are what EagleFiler was expecting. To 
verify the
entire library, select the Records source and choose Verify. You can also verify individual files 
or folders.

Detecting File Corruption

Verification can help you detect file corruption before it becomes a serious problem. For example, 
if there is
damage to your disk and a file becomes corrupt, you’ll learn of the problem as soon as you use the 
Verify
command. Without Verify, you would only learn of the problem when you tried to access the file 
(perhaps
a long time in the future), and perhaps not even then, because the corruption might not be readily 
apparent.
Because you learn about the damage early, you can restore a correct version of the file from a 
backup, rather
than filling your future backups with damaged copies of the file.

How Verification Works

In order to detect when files have changed, EagleFiler stores a checksum of each file. If 
EagleFiler reads a
file and calculates the same checksum that it got before, it knows that the file has not changed. 
Thus, if the
file was in good condition before, it is still in good condition. If EagleFiler calculates a 
different checksum,
that means that the file’s contents are different.

Sometimes, the checksum should be different. For example, when you edit a file, you intentionally 
change its
contents, resulting in a different checksum. When you edit a file within EagleFiler, EagleFiler 
automatically
updates its stored checksum to match the file’s new contents. Thus, if you only edit files using 
EagleFiler,
the checksums will always be in sync with the files’ contents, and any checksum that doesn’t match 
means
that the file is damaged.

EagleFiler also allows you edit files using other applications. For example, you can double-click a 
Microsoft
Word document to open it in Word, make some changes, and choose File ▷ Save. In this case, the file 
has
changed, but there is no way for EagleFiler to know that this is because of what you did in Word. 
The
changes could have been due to damage. Thus, if you edit a file outside of EagleFiler, you must use 
the
Update Checksum command to tell EagleFiler that the file’s current contents are correct. EagleFiler 
will
then update its stored checksum to match.

Using the Verify Command

Verify is a specialized feature for people who want extra data integrity protection. If you don’t 
need this,
or if you frequently edit files outside of EagleFiler and don’t want to have to Update Checksum, 
then you
can simply ignore the Verify command. EagleFiler will then behave like a normal Mac application: it 
won’t
complain about files being different than it expected, but neither will it detect when they are 
damaged.

107


A verification can fail with two different types of errors:

Missing File

This means that you had a file in your library, but it is no longer where EagleFiler expects to 
find it.
Probably the file (or a containing folder) was renamed, moved, or deleted using an application other
than EagleFiler. (As described in the Library Folders section, you should not do this.)

The Errors window shows the expected name of the file, and you can click Reveal to show its expected
folder in the Finder or Reveal in Library to show its expected folder in EagleFiler.

If you can find the file in the Finder (or in a backup), use the Finder to move back to the expected
folder. Then EagleFiler will be able to find it again.

If you cannot find the file, you click the Trash button to delete it in EagleFiler and then empty 
the
trash so that EagleFiler stops looking for it.

If you have reorganized the files in the Finder and cannot move them back to their proper locations,
as a last resort you can rebuild the library to tell EagleFiler that you like everything the way it 
is now.
However, this will lose metadata such as custom titles, from names, and notes for files that have 
been
moved.

Bad Checksum

This means that the file’s contents no longer match what EagleFiler was expecting. If you have 
modified
the file outside of EagleFiler, this is normal and you can click Update Checksum to tell EagleFiler
that the file is OK. Otherwise, the file is probably damaged, and you should try to restore it from 
a
backup. Use the Finder to move the correct file into place, replacing the one with the bad 
checksum.

To quickly delete a large number of verification errors, choose Edit ▷ Select All and then press 
the Delete
key.

Repairing File Ownership and Permissions

In addition to detecting damaged file content, the Verify command can optionally fix file metadata 
prob-
lems. See the FixOwnershipWhenVerifying and FixPermissionsWhenVerifying options in the esoteric
preferences.

5.6.10 Update Checksum

The Update Checksum command tells EagleFiler that you have edited the selected file(s) using another
application. This is necessary for proper operation of the Verify command and duplicates detection.

If you do not edit files outside of EagleFiler, or if you do not use Verify or duplicates 
detection, you can
ignore the Update Checksum command.

5.6.11 Merge Mailboxes/Message Files

Merges the selected mailboxes (or .eml files) into a single mailbox file with the name and location 
of the
oldest mailbox (or .eml file) in the selection. The tags and notes of the messages are preserved. 
(Source
URLs of the mailboxes and custom titles of message files, in the unlikely event that there are any, 
are not.)
The original files are then moved to the trash.

108


Merging can reduce clutter in the source list and speed up EagleFiler. For more information about 
mailbox
files and message files, see the Importing Mail section.

Apple Mail .emlx Files

Although it can search and display them, EagleFiler cannot directly merge .emlx files, and it is 
generally
not recommended to use .emlx files because there can be multiple files per message that may get 
separated.
If you follow the instructions in the Importing Mail From Apple Mail section, you can ensure that 
EagleFiler
imports mail using either the .eml or mbox format, both of which are standard formats, and both of 
which
support merging.

5.6.12 Reply to Message

This command lets you reply to a message in your default e-mail program. You can also double-click a
message to open it and then use the mail program’s native reply feature.

5.6.13 Open With External Viewer

Opens the selected records in a specialized viewer application such as Preview, Safari, or Mail. 
Folders and
mailboxes will open in a new window in EagleFiler. If you open an e-mail, the message that’s 
displayed in
Mail is the message that’s stored in EagleFiler’s library, not the original message that was 
imported from
Mail (which might already have been deleted).

If a search is in effect, EagleFiler passes the search string to the external viewer so that it can 
show you the
matches in the document.

Double-clicking a record is a shortcut for choosing this command from the menu. Hold down the 
Option key
to open the source URL instead of the stored file.

To open the record using an application other than the default, use the Open With command.

To change the keyboard shortcut for this command, see the CommandOToOpenRecord esoteric preference.

5.6.14 Open With

The Open With submenu lets you temporarily override the default application for opening a file.  For
example, perhaps you normally open PDF files using Preview, but in a particular circumstance you 
want to
use Adobe Reader instead. To do this, select the file and choose Open With ▷ Adobe Reader from the
Record menu or the contextual menu.

The Always Open With submenu lets you change the default application for all files of a particular 
content
type (UTI⁵⁸). For example, perhaps you want all your HTML files to open in BBEdit when 
double-clicked.

To change the default application just for a particular file, use the Reveal in Finder command, 
then choose

Get Info from the Finder’s File menu and look in the Open with section of the info window.

⁵⁸http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Uniform Type Identifier

109


EagleFiler will open Web archives in Safari even if you’ve chosen Firefox or Google Chrome as your 
default
Web browser. This is because Web archives are a Safari-specific format. However, you can use the 
Open
Source URL command to open a live version of the Web archive in your default Web browser.

5.6.15 Open Source URL

With a Web archive record (or an RTFD file converted from a Web archive) selected, this opens the 
(live,
not archived) Web page in your Web browser.

You can also Option-double-click on a record to open its source URL.

EagleFiler uses the Default web browser that’s set in the General pane of System Settings (or in 
Safari’s
preferences on older versions of macOS).

5.6.16 Quick Look

EagleFiler uses Apple’s Quick Look⁵⁹ technology to preview in the record viewer files that it 
doesn’t natively
understand. The Quick Look menu command lets you open a larger preview window.

You can Quick Look multiple records at once to compare thumbnails of them in the Quick Look window.
A shortcut for opening the Quick Look window is to press the Spacebar when in the records list.

5.6.17 Slideshow

Opens a full-screen Quick Look window to view the selected records. To see this menu command, hold 
down
the Option key.

A shortcut for opening the Quick Look window is to press Option-Spacebar when in the records list.

5.6.18 Reveal in Finder

This shows the selected records in the Finder. If you have Path Finder⁶⁰ running, the files will be 
revealed
in it instead. You can set another external viewer by entering a Terminal command. For example, to 
use
ForkLift, enter:

defaults write com.c-command.EagleFiler NSFileViewer com.binarynights.ForkLift-3

5.7  The Format Menu

This menu contains commands for use when editing a rich text file in EagleFiler’s viewer or when 
editing
a note. You can change the font and style and add clickable links, lists, and tables. In addition 
to the

⁵⁹http://www.apple.com/findouthow/mac/#quicklook
⁶⁰http://www.cocoatech.com

110


standard macOS formatting commands, EagleFiler provides a command called Highlight, which makes the
background of the selected text yellow, as if it had been drawn over with a highlighter.

5.8  The Window Menu

5.8.1 Show Info

This window lets you view and edit the properties of the selected records. You can type Tab to move 
between
to text fields, or Control-Tab to move out of the notes text view. The Info inspector can be opened 
via
Command-I or Command-Option-I.

111


File Properties

This shows the file’s name, kind, size, and dates, as well as EagleFiler metadata such as the title,
source URL, and from. These are described in the Records List section of the manual.

If the file didn’t have an embedded title (or you set the title to be blank), EagleFiler will use 
the
filename (without the extension) as the title, and the title will stay in sync with the filename if 
you
rename it.

Label

This is the Finder label of the file. For more information, see the Set Label section.


Tags

This shows the tags assigned to the record. You may find it more convenient to create and assign 
tags
by typing them in the text field than by using the Show Tags command. For more information about
tags, see the Add Tags and Notes section of the manual.

Notes

This shows the notes that are associated with the record. Most of the commands for editing notes
are in the Format menu. You can use the Copy Record Link to copy a link to an EagleFiler record;
then paste the link into another record’s note so that you can easily find one record while viewing 
the
other. As a shortcut, you can type Option-Tab to start a bulleted list or Option-Shift-Tab to dedent
the current list item. For more information about notes, see the Add Tags and Notes section of the
manual.

To make changes to more than one record at once, you can use the Batch Change... command.

5.8.2 Show Tags

This window shows a list of tags for the current library. You can also view the tags using the Show 
Tag
Cloud command.

112


The columns are:

√

The box is checked if all of the selected records in the browser window have this tag. It shows a - 
sign
if some (but not all) of the selected records have the tag. It is disabled if no records are 
selected.

•

The abbreviation (if any) for the tag. For example, the “unread” tag is shown as a blue  , and the
“flagged” tag is shown as a red ▷. Abbreviations are shown in the Tags column of the records list.
Double-click on an abbreviation to edit it. The abbreviation can be composed of ordinary letters, as
well as any of the special symbols and emoji found on the EagleFiler Tag Symbols Web page. You

113


can open this page by clicking on the Characters button in the toolbar. You can also use the Tag
Abbreviation Style AppleScript to switch between different sets of symbols for the built-in tags.

Name

The name of the tag, which is shown in the Tag Names column of the records list. Double-click on a
name to edit it. (The names of built-in tags such as “unread” cannot be edited.) Each tag must have
a unique name.

You can give the tags inspector keyboard focus by:

• Clicking in its title bar.

• Choosing Show Tags from the Record menu.

• Clicking the Tags button in the toolbar of a browser window.

• Editing an abbreviation or name.

Once the tags inspector has keyboard focus, you can:

• Type the first few letters of a tag’s name to select it in the list.

• Press the spacebar to toggle whether the selected records in the browser window have the selected 
tags.
This is like checking or unchecking the boxes of all the selected tags at once.

• Click the Colors button in the toolbar. Then choose a new color for the selected tag(s) and 
abbrevi-
ation(s).

You can Control-click on a tag to reveal it in the source list, thus showing all the records with 
that tag.
See also: How do Finder tags work with EagleFiler?

5.8.3 Show Tag Cloud

The Tag Cloud window shows a compact listing of all the tags. You can click on a tag to toggle 
whether
it’s assigned to the selected record(s).

114


A shortcut for opening the Tag Cloud window is to Option-click the Tags button in the toolbar.

5.8.4 Activity

EagleFiler can do many operations—such as adding files and URLs to the library, indexing, 
verifying—in the
background. This window shows a list of the tasks that EagleFiler is currently working on for each 
library.

115


A shortcut for opening the Activity window is to click the progress spinner at the bottom of a 
browser
window.

5.8.5 Drop Pad

The Drop Pad tells you which library is active. You can drag files onto the Drop Pad to import them 
into
the active library. You can use the pop-up menu on the Drop Pad to change the active library 
(without
introducing window clutter). The Drop Pad also provides information about whether EagleFiler can 
capture
from  the current application.

116


You can control the number of recent libraries shown in the Drop Pad window via the General pane in
System Settings. You can clear the list of recent libraries from the File ▷ Open Recent menu.

5.8.6 Errors

This window shows a list of errors that have occurred since you launched EagleFiler. You can select 
errors
and copy them to the clipboard.

The Verify and Importing Mail From Apple Mail sections describe some common types of errors and how 
to
deal with them.

You can Option-click the Reveal button to open the file with its default application instead of 
revealing it
in the Finder.

5.9  The Help Menu

This menu provides access to the full EagleFiler documentation (in Apple Help or PDF format) as 
well as a
link to the technical support Web site.

5.10  The Dock Menu

To access the Dock menu, right-click or hold down the Control key when clicking on EagleFiler’s 
Dock icon.
The Open Recent commands let you access EagleFiler libraries that might not currently be open. The

Capture From <Application> command is equivalent to pressing the capture key. The Import Clip-

117


board command will import any text on the clipboard as a new rich text file. The New Record commands
let you create new files in the current library.

6  Settings

118


6.1  Capture key

You can always import into EagleFiler using Import URLs..., Import Files. . ., or drag and drop. 
However,
if you are already viewing the information that you want import, it’s much easier to just press the 
capture
key.

When you press the capture key, EagleFiler automatically determines what you’re currently viewing 
(or
what you have selected) and imports it into the current library. If no library is currently open, 
EagleFiler
opens the Capture with options window so that you can pick a library.

Note: The first time you press the capture key, you may need to give EagleFiler Automation access.

The Capture Process

EagleFiler will bounce its Dock icon once and show a camera icon in the Dock to let you know that 
the
capture has started. This phase is when EagleFiler figures out which items you asked it to import. 
It usually
only takes a fraction of a second, but it can last longer if you’ve selected a large number of 
messages in
Apple Mail. In that case, you will see an occasional status window in the center of the screen 
telling you
how many messages it’s found so far. When EagleFiler has figured out what to import, it will play a 
camera
shutter sound. Then the Dock icon will change to show the green import arrow. This is the main 
phase of
the importing, and you’ll see progress in EagleFiler’s Activity window and a spinner in the main 
window.
When the import has finished, you’ll see a notification in Notification Center.

Which Key to Press

By default, the capture key is F1. If you have a notebook or an aluminum Apple keyboard, you’ll 
need to
hold the fn key to type F1 unless you’ve checked Use all F1, F2, etc. keys as standard function keys
in the Keyboard & Mouse settings pane or are using FunctionFlip⁶¹. If you have a Microsoft keyboard,
you may need to check the position of the Fn Lock key. You can also change the capture key to a 
different
key or key combination if you prefer.

You can also capture by clicking and holding on EagleFiler’s Dock icon and choosing Capture From

<Application> from the menu.

When You Can Capture

The capture key works when the frontmost application is one that supports capture. The Drop Pad 
window
will tell you when this is the case.

EagleFiler must be running in order for the capture key to work. Thus, you may wish to add 
EagleFiler
to your Login Items in the Accounts pane of System Settings. You can easily do this by clicking on 
the
EagleFiler icon in the Dock and choosing Open at Login.

Importing Only Part of a Page

⁶¹http://kevingessner.com/software/functionflip/

119


If you’d rather import just the selected text instead of the entire Web page or document, you can 
use drag
and drop or the EagleFiler: Import service (Command!) instead of the capture key.

6.2  Capture with options

This works like the capture key: you press it while in one of the applications that support 
capture, and
EagleFiler imports the “current item” into your library. The difference is that you can specify 
which library
to import into, and which folder within that library. You can also set the title, from name, label, 
tags, and
notes:

EagleFiler remembers this metadata (except the title and notes) for each library, so it’s easy to 
quickly
120


capture a bunch of related items. Pressing the Reset button clears the metadata and sets the folder 
so that
EagleFiler once again imports into the Unfiled source.

There are keyboard shortcuts for choosing the library (Command-1), folder (Command-2), Label 
(Command-
3), Reset (Command-K), Cancel (Command-. or Escape), and Capture (Enter or Command-Return).
Once the folder menu is open, you can select a folder by typing the first few letters of its 
name.You can
switch between the Metadata and Source tabs using Control-Tab and Control-Shift-Tab.

6.3  Quick entry

Press this hotkey to bring up a dialog for creating a new file. You can enter the text content of 
the file and
set the metadata (label, tags, notes, etc.). The Format pop-up menu lets you choose whether to 
create a
Rich text (RTF or RTFD) or plain text (UTF-8) file.

Pressing the Reset button clears the metadata and sets the folder so that EagleFiler once again 
imports
into the Unfiled source.

121


There are keyboard shortcuts for choosing the library (Command-1), folder (Command-2), Label 
(Command-
3), Reset (Command-K), Cancel (Command-. or Escape), and Save (Enter or Command-Return). Once
the folder menu is open, you can select a folder by typing the first few letters of its name. You 
can switch
between the Metadata and Text tabs using Control-Tab and Control-Shift-Tab.

6.4  Web page format

When you import an entire Web page, EagleFiler can save it using the following formats:

Bookmark

A .webloc file that stores the URL and page title. This does not save the contents of the page, thus
conserving disk space but restricting your search options. You can also edit (and update) the URL in
a bookmark.

HTML

A plain .html file that stores the page’s text content.  Formatting and images may not be fully
preserved, in the effort to save a smaller file in an open format.  If you want to preserve the full
formatting and images, consider using the Web archive format instead.

PDF

PDF files preserve the text, formatting, clickable links, and images. Web pages containing HTML
frames cannot be saved as PDF files; when importing such pages, EagleFiler will save them as Web
archives.

PDF (Single Page)

As above, except that the PDF is formatted as a single page and with tighter margins for easier
on-screen viewing. For best results, set EagleFiler or your PDF viewer to display in “Single Page
Continuous” mode. Printing PDFs in this format can be a problem, however, because the PDF page
will generally be much larger than a sheet of paper.

Plain Text

Plain text files include the text content of the page, with no formatting or images. Thus, they make
very efficient use of disk space.

Rich Text

RTF files preserve the text, formatting, and clickable links, but not the images.

Rich Text With Images

An RTFD package that preserves the text, formatting, clickable links, and images.

Web archive

Safari Web archives preserve the entire page contents in its original format (HTML, CSS, images).
They’re slower to display than PDFs, but you can resize the window to change the displayed width,
and you can adjust the font size (often more useful than zooming a PDF). Web archives can be viewed
on Macs (using Safari) and iPhones, but currently there are no Windows or Linux applications to
display them. Firefox and Google Chrome do not support Safari Web archives.

You can use bookmarklets to temporarily override the format chosen in the settings.

122


6.5  Spotlight comments

This setting controls what happens to a file’s Spotlight comments (a.k.a. Finder comments) when you 
import
it into EagleFiler.

Ignore

EagleFiler preserves the Spotlight comments.

Import as notes and tags

EagleFiler extracts tags (prefixed by & or marked using Punakea’s format) and assigns them as Eagle-
Filer tags. It imports the remaining comments text as notes.

Import as tags

Each word in the comments is imported as a tag.

EagleFiler always imports tags that are stored in the file’s extended attributes under 
com.apple.metadata:kOMUserTags

by applications such as Tags, TagIt, and Default Folder X.

6.6  Fonts

Sources

See the Sidebar icon size pop-up menu in the General tab of System Settings and SourcesRowSizeStyle

in the esoteric preferences.

Lists

Used in the records list in browser windows and in the list of tags in the tags inspector.

Rich text

Used for e-mail header information, HTML messages, and as the default font for notes.

Plain text

Used for plain text e-mail messages and text files.

The fonts for Web archives are mostly controlled by the Web archives themselves.

6.7  Search highlight color

This is the color that EagleFiler uses to emphasize the search terms in the records list and record 
viewer.

6.8  Quoted Text Colors

EagleFiler colors plain text e-mail messages according to the number of quote characters at the 
start of each
line. The pop-down menu lets you choose a preset coloring scheme.

123


6.9  Remember open libraries between launches

If this is checked, EagleFiler will remember which libraries were open when you quit it, and it 
will re-open
them the next time EagleFiler is launched.

In addition, you can put aliases to your favorite libraries in the folder:

/Users/<username>/Library/Application Support/EagleFiler/Startup Items

so that EagleFiler will always open them at launch. (See How can I open the Library folder?.) You 
can hold
down the Shift key at launch to prevent it from re-opening the libraries or opening the startup 
items.

If EagleFiler is closed, and you don’t want it to re-open a certain library at the next launch, you 
can remove
that library’s alias from the folder:

/Users/<username>/Library/Application Support/EagleFiler/Open Libraries

6.10  Copy tags to Spotlight comments

This feature is only recommended for use with macOS 10.7 through 10.8. As of macOS 10.9, EagleFiler
supports Finder tags, which are indexed by Spotlight and are much faster than copying tags to 
Spotlight
comments.

If this is checked, EagleFiler will set the Spotlight comments for each file to the names of the 
tags that it’s
been assigned. This enables you to search for a file using Spotlight by typing tag names as part of 
the query.
Any existing comments will be lost. If this is not checked, EagleFiler will preserve the existing 
Spotlight
comments when importing files.

EagleFiler will automatically copy the tags to the comments when a library is opened and 
periodically
thereafter. You can force it to update the comments by using the Backup Metadata command.

There is an esoteric preference to control the tag prefix that’s added to each tag name in the 
comments. The
default prefix is “&”.

6.11  Allow duplicate files in library

Normally EagleFiler will prevent you from importing a file if a file with the same contents (in the 
data fork)
is already in the library. You can check this option if you prefer to import every file, even 
duplicates. In
order for duplicate detection to work, your files’ checksums must be up-to-date. For more 
information, please
read about the Verify and Update Checksum commands.

When you import via Scan for New Files, EagleFiler does not check for duplicates. This is because 
you have
specifically put the files in EagleFiler’s library folder.

To remove duplicates after the files are already in the library, see the Remove Duplicate Files 
script.

Duplicate URLs

124


Archived Web pages with the same source URL will generally contain different data, so EagleFiler 
will not
treat them as duplicates. However, there is a script for removing duplicates by URL if that’s what 
you want
to do.

Duplicate E-mail Messages

• EagleFiler checks for duplicates at the file level. Thus, when you import a mailbox file 
containing a
bunch of e-mail messages, EagleFiler checks for a duplicate mailbox but does not check the 
individual
messages within that mailbox file for duplicates.

• When importing the selected messages from an e-mail client (using the capture key), EagleFiler 
auto-
matically skips duplicate messages within the same mailbox.

• To prevent importing all duplicate e-mail messages, you can import them as individual .eml files. 
See
the Importing Mail section.

• To remove duplicate e-mail messages from a mailbox, after importing, see the Remove Duplicate
Messages script.

6.12  Esoteric Preferences

You can set esoteric EagleFiler preferences by clicking the links on this page. Unlike with regular 
settings,
you must generally quit and re-launch EagleFiler in order for an esoteric preference to take 
effect.

AlwaysShowNewRecordSheet

When you create a new record, EagleFiler normally shows the sheet to enter the filename only if⁶² 
the
File column is hidden. You can also set it so that filename entry is always via the sheet⁶³ rather 
than
the records list.

AutomaticallyBackupMetadata

EagleFiler automatically backs up⁶⁴ your libraries’ metadata (and, at the same time, copies tags to
the Spotlight comments, if you’ve asked it to do that), but you can turn this feature off⁶⁵ for a 
slight
speed increase.

CalculateFolderSizes

This controls whether EagleFiler calculates folder sizes⁶⁶ to display them in the records list. 
Turning
off⁶⁷ this feature will increase EagleFiler’s responsiveness.

CaptureNotSupportedJustBeep

Normally if you press the capture key in an application that EagleFiler doesn’t know how to capture
from, it presents an error alert⁶⁸ that explains the situation. You can also set it to just beep⁶⁹ 
if you
understand how capturing works and prefer a less intrusive notification when you accidentally press
the   key.

⁶²x-eaglefiler://default?k=AlwaysShowNewRecordSheet&v=NO
⁶³x-eaglefiler://default?k=AlwaysShowNewRecordSheet&v=YES

⁶⁴x-eaglefiler://default?k=AutomaticallyBackupMetadata&v=YES
⁶⁵x-eaglefiler://default?k=AutomaticallyBackupMetadata&v=NO
⁶⁶x-eaglefiler://default?k=CalculateFolderSizes&v=YES

⁶⁷x-eaglefiler://default?k=CalculateFolderSizes&v=NO

⁶⁸x-eaglefiler://default?k=CaptureNotSupportedJustBeep&v=NO
⁶⁹x-eaglefiler://default?k=CaptureNotSupportedJustBeep&v=YES

125


CaseSensitiveTagCompletion

Normally, tag auto-completion is case-insensitive⁷⁰ so that you see as many matching tags as 
possible.
You can also set it to be case-sensitive⁷¹ so that it is easier to type new tag names that are 
similar to
existing tags but with differing case.

ClearSearchWhenChangingSources

Normally EagleFiler clears the search⁷² so that clicking on a different folder takes EagleFiler out 
of
search mode and shows you all the records. You can also set EagleFiler to preserve your search 
query⁷³
(like in OmniFocus) when you view different sources, so that you can easily search different folders
without retyping the query.

CommandOToOpenRecord

Normally EagleFiler uses the keyboard shortcut Command-Shift-O⁷⁴ for Open With External
Viewer. You can also set it to use Command-O⁷⁵ (swapping the shortcut with Open Library...).

DarkTextBackgroundInDarkMode

Normally EagleFiler will use adaptive color mapping⁷⁶ (like TextEdit) when displaying rich text doc-
uments and notes so that you automatically see light text on a dark background when your Mac is
running in Dark Mode. You can turn off⁷⁷ this behavior if you need to precisely edit the colors in 
your
documents or notes so that WYSIWYG.

DefaultMessageEncoding

When a message doesn’t specify which text encoding it uses, EagleFiler has to guess. An incorrect 
guess
may cause the message to display using strange accents or garbage characters. By default EagleFiler
guesses MacRoman⁷⁸, but you can change it to guess ISO Latin 1⁷⁹ or UTF-8⁸⁰ instead.

DefaultWebEncoding

When a Web page or HTML file doesn’t specify which text encoding it uses, EagleFiler has to guess. 
An
incorrect guess may cause the page to display using strange accents or garbage characters. By 
default
EagleFiler guesses ISO-8859-1⁸¹, but you can change it to guess Macintosh⁸² or UTF-8⁸³ instead.

DisableNotificationCenter

EagleFiler normally posts to Notification Center⁸⁴ when it finishes importing a batch of files. You 
can
control in Notification Center when and how the notifications are displayed, or disable⁸⁵ this 
feature
entirely if you don’t want your filenames to be stored in the Notification Center database.

DisplayImagesWithQuickLook

⁷⁰x-eaglefiler://default?k=CaseSensitiveTagCompletion&v=NO
⁷¹x-eaglefiler://default?k=CaseSensitiveTagCompletion&v=YES

⁷²x-eaglefiler://default?k=ClearSearchWhenChangingSources&v=YES
⁷³x-eaglefiler://default?k=ClearSearchWhenChangingSources&v=NO
⁷⁴x-eaglefiler://default?k=CommandOToOpenRecord&v=NO

⁷⁵x-eaglefiler://default?k=CommandOToOpenRecord&v=YES

⁷⁶x-eaglefiler://default?k=DarkTextBackgroundInDarkMode&v=YES
⁷⁷x-eaglefiler://default?k=DarkTextBackgroundInDarkMode&v=NO
⁷⁸x-eaglefiler://default?k=DefaultMessageEncoding&v=macroman
⁷⁹x-eaglefiler://default?k=DefaultMessageEncoding&v=latin-1
⁸⁰x-eaglefiler://default?k=DefaultMessageEncoding&v=utf-8

⁸¹x-eaglefiler://default?k=DefaultWebEncoding&v=ISO-8859-1
⁸²x-eaglefiler://default?k=DefaultWebEncoding&v=macintosh
⁸³x-eaglefiler://default?k=DefaultWebEncoding&v=utf-8

⁸⁴x-eaglefiler://default?k=DisableNotificationCenter&v=NO
⁸⁵x-eaglefiler://default?k=DisableNotificationCenter&v=YES

126


To prevent leakage of sensitive image data, you can tell EagleFiler not use Quick Look to display
images⁸⁶, or go back to the default behavior of using Quick Look to display SVG images⁸⁷.

DisplayPDFsWithQuickLook

There are some bugs in macOS 10.12’s PDF view. You can tell EagleFiler to instead use the Quick
Look view⁸⁸ (which is unaffected by some of the bugs but has other limitations) to display PDF 
files,
or go back to the default behavior of using PDFView⁸⁹.

EnableJavaScript

Normally, EagleFiler will use JavaScript⁹⁰ to help display HTML files and Web archives. However, you
can also disable JavaScript⁹¹, which may make the pages less distracting to view. EagleFiler always
enables JavaScript when importing Web pages (e.g. to make sure all the content is saved into a Web
archive or PDF) except for sites where JavaScript is known to cause problems, and unless you have
changed the EnableJavaScriptForWebTool esoteric preference below.

EnableJavaScriptForMail

Normally, EagleFiler will use JavaScript⁹² to help display HTML e-mail messages. However, you can
also disable JavaScript⁹³, which can work around some crashing bugs in macOS.

EnableJavaScriptForWebTool

Normally, EagleFiler will use JavaScript⁹⁴ when importing a URL because many Web pages use
JavaScript to load or help display content.  However, you can also disable JavaScript⁹⁵ if you are
worried about JavaScript security bugs on older versions of macOS.

EnableWebPlugIns

Normally, EagleFiler will show⁹⁶ content from Web plug-ins (such as Flash) when displaying an HTML
file or Web archive. However, you can also disable plug-ins⁹⁷ if you don’t want to see this 
content.

ErrorsOpenForDuplicates

Normally, EagleFiler will open the Errors window⁹⁸ when a file has been skipped during an import
because it’s a duplicate. However, you can also set EagleFiler to log the error without opening the
window⁹⁹, for example if you expect there to be duplicates and don’t care to see them.

ExcludeIndexesFromBackup

EagleFiler’s index files are normally included in Time Machine backups¹⁰⁰. This way, you can immedi-
ately search your library after restoring it from backup. To save space on the backup device and 
speed
up your backups, you can set EagleFiler to exclude the indexes from backups¹⁰¹. The downside to this
is that, as with Spotlight, you’ll have to wait for the files to be re-indexed after restoring.

⁸⁶x-eaglefiler://default?k=DisplayImagesWithQuickLook&v=NO
⁸⁷x-eaglefiler://default?k=DisplayImagesWithQuickLook&v=YES
⁸⁸x-eaglefiler://default?k=DisplayPDFsWithQuickLook&v=YES
⁸⁹x-eaglefiler://default?k=DisplayPDFsWithQuickLook&v=NO
⁹⁰x-eaglefiler://default?k=EnableJavaScript&v=YES

⁹¹x-eaglefiler://default?k=EnableJavaScript&v=NO

⁹²x-eaglefiler://default?k=EnableJavaScriptForMail&v=YES
⁹³x-eaglefiler://default?k=EnableJavaScriptForMail&v=NO

⁹⁴x-eaglefiler://default?k=EnableJavaScriptForWebTool&v=YES
⁹⁵x-eaglefiler://default?k=EnableJavaScriptForWebTool&v=NO
⁹⁶x-eaglefiler://default?k=EnableWebPlugIns&v=YES

⁹⁷x-eaglefiler://default?k=EnableWebPlugIns&v=NO

⁹⁸x-eaglefiler://default?k=ErrorsOpenForDuplicates&v=YES
⁹⁹x-eaglefiler://default?k=ErrorsOpenForDuplicates&v=NO
¹⁰⁰x-eaglefiler://default?k=ExcludeIndexesFromBackup&v=NO
¹⁰¹x-eaglefiler://default?k=ExcludeIndexesFromBackup&v=YES

127


FindPanelDiacriticInsensitive

EagleFiler’s Find panel normally works like TextEdit’s¹⁰². Searching for “e” does not find “´e”. You
can also make EagleFiler’s Find panel diacritic-insensitive¹⁰³ so that “e” matches “´e”, “u¨” 
matches
“u”, etc., as always happens with EagleFiler’s library search and Spotlight. This feature does not 
work
in Web or PDF views.

FixOwnershipWhenVerifying

With this option enabled¹⁰⁴, when you use the Verify command EagleFiler will set all the files to be
owned by the current user. With this option disabled¹⁰⁵ (the default), EagleFiler will not change 
any
file ownership except when necessary because you are editing a file.

FixPermissionsWhenVerifying

With this option enabled¹⁰⁶, when you use the Verify command EagleFiler will set all the files to 
have
standard permissions. With this option disabled¹⁰⁷ (the default), EagleFiler will not change any 
file
permissions except when necessary because you are editing a file.

FolderMailboxTitleSeparateFromFilename

Normally EagleFiler will keep the titles of folders and mailboxes in sync¹⁰⁸ with their filenames. 
You
can also set it to allow the titles to be distinct¹⁰⁹ from the filenames. This is potentially 
useful if you
need to manage a folder structure using fixed filenames but you want to have longer, more 
descriptive
titles in EagleFiler.

HighlightSearchMatches

Normally EagleFiler will highlight in the record viewer¹¹⁰ the words that match your search query.
Disabling this feature¹¹¹ will provide a speed increase.

ImportLoneMessageAsMailbox

Normally EagleFiler will import a single e-mail message as a .eml file¹¹². This makes it easier to 
view
the message directly in the records list; multiple .eml files can later be merged into a mailbox if 
desired.
You can also set EagleFiler to import a lone message as a mailbox file¹¹³ containing a single 
message.
This makes it easier to merge it with existing mailboxes.

ImportSpotlightKeywords

EagleFiler normally ignores Spotlight keywords¹¹⁴ when importing files to avoid cluttering your tags
list with irrelevant or incorrect entries. You can also set EagleFiler to import Spotlight keywords 
as
tags¹¹⁵ if you generally like the keywords that are assigned to your files.

ImportTextAsWebArchive

¹⁰²x-eaglefiler://default?k=FindPanelDiacriticInsensitive&v=NO
¹⁰³x-eaglefiler://default?k=FindPanelDiacriticInsensitive&v=YES
¹⁰⁴x-eaglefiler://default?k=FixOwnershipWhenVerifying&v=YES
¹⁰⁵x-eaglefiler://default?k=FixOwnershipWhenVerifying&v=NO

¹⁰⁶x-eaglefiler://default?k=FixPermissionsWhenVerifying&v=YES
¹⁰⁷x-eaglefiler://default?k=FixPermissionsWhenVerifying&v=NO

¹⁰⁸x-eaglefiler://default?k=FolderMailboxTitleSeparateFromFilename&v=NO
¹⁰⁹x-eaglefiler://default?k=FolderMailboxTitleSeparateFromFilename&v=YES
¹¹⁰x-eaglefiler://default?k=HighlightSearchMatches&v=YES

¹¹¹x-eaglefiler://default?k=HighlightSearchMatches&v=NO
¹¹²x-eaglefiler://default?k=ImportLoneMessageAsMailbox&v=NO

¹¹³x-eaglefiler://default?k=ImportLoneMessageAsMailbox&v=YES
¹¹⁴x-eaglefiler://default?k=ImportSpotlightKeywords&v=NO
¹¹⁵x-eaglefiler://default?k=ImportSpotlightKeywords&v=YES

128


When importing the selected text from a Web view (via drag and drop, the Service menu, or the
Import Clipboard command), EagleFiler normally uses the Web archive format¹¹⁶, as this preserves
all of the original information. You can instead set it to import in RTF(D) format¹¹⁷ for easier 
editing.

ImportTitleFromFileContents

When importing a file, EagleFiler normally reads the file’s own metadata¹¹⁸ to find its title (e.g. 
one
that was specified when creating a PDF or Word file) and sets the title in EagleFiler accordingly.
You can also set EagleFiler to ignore the file’s own title¹¹⁹, e.g. if you frequently download 
files with
meaningless titles and would prefer to have EagleFiler show the filename.

MarkNewRecordsAsUnread

Normally EagleFiler will mark newly imported records as unread¹²⁰, but you can also tell it to leave
them untagged¹²¹.  This does not affect the Capture With Options window, since that always
suggests the tags from the previous capture.

MaxEditableTextFileSizeInMB

Normally EagleFiler will display the entire contents¹²² of a text file, even if it’s many 
megabytes. This
can take a long time. You can speed it up by setting EagleFiler to only show the first 10 MB¹²³ of a
text file.

MediaStyle

If a Web page includes multiple stylesheets, you can choose whether EagleFiler displays it using the
print stylesheet¹²⁴ or the default stylesheet¹²⁵.

MediaStylePDF

If a Web page includes multiple stylesheets, you can choose whether EagleFiler creates a PDF using
the print stylesheet¹²⁶ or the default (screen) stylesheet¹²⁷.

MJTUpdaterDeleteDiskImage

Normally, the Software Update... feature will clean up¹²⁸ after itself after downloading a new 
version.
You can also set it to leave the disk image¹²⁹ file in your Downloads folder.

MJTWindowToolbarStyleUnified

Normally on macOS 11 and later, EagleFiler uses the new unified¹³⁰ window style where the window’s
title and toolbar buttons are shown side-by-side. You can also switch to the old expanded¹³¹ style
where the title is above the toolbar, which leaves room for more toolbar buttons extending to the 
left
edge of the window.

¹¹⁶x-eaglefiler://default?k=ImportTextAsWebArchive&v=YES
¹¹⁷x-eaglefiler://default?k=ImportTextAsWebArchive&v=NO

¹¹⁸x-eaglefiler://default?k=ImportTitleFromFileContents&v=YES
¹¹⁹x-eaglefiler://default?k=ImportTitleFromFileContents&v=NO
¹²⁰x-eaglefiler://default?k=MarkNewRecordsAsUnread&v=YES

¹²¹x-eaglefiler://default?k=MarkNewRecordsAsUnread&v=NO
¹²²x-eaglefiler://default?k=MaxEditableTextFileSizeInMB&v=0

¹²³x-eaglefiler://default?k=MaxEditableTextFileSizeInMB&v=10
¹²⁴x-eaglefiler://default?k=MediaStyle&v=print

¹²⁵x-eaglefiler://default?k=MediaStyle&v=

¹²⁶x-eaglefiler://default?k=MediaStylePDF&v=print
¹²⁷x-eaglefiler://default?k=MediaStylePDF&delete=yes

¹²⁸x-eaglefiler://default?k=MJTUpdaterDeleteDiskImage&v=YES
¹²⁹x-eaglefiler://default?k=MJTUpdaterDeleteDiskImage&v=NO

¹³⁰x-eaglefiler://default?k=MJTWindowToolbarStyleUnified&delete=1
¹³¹x-eaglefiler://default?k=MJTWindowToolbarStyleUnified&v=1

129


OldApplicationIcon

If you prefer, you can use the old application icon¹³² from EagleFiler 1.0 through 1.4 rather than 
the
new icon¹³³ from EagleFiler 1.9. This setting only applies to the icon in the Dock while EagleFiler 
is
running.

OldApplicationIcon1.5

If you prefer, you can use the old application icon¹³⁴ from EagleFiler 1.4 through 1.8 rather than 
the
new icon¹³⁵ from EagleFiler 1.9. This setting only applies to the icon in the Dock while EagleFiler 
is
running.

OpenEagleFilerURLsInNewWindow

Normally EagleFiler opens x-eaglefiler URLs in a an existing browser window¹³⁶. You can also set
it to create a new browser window¹³⁷.

PDFWebBackgrounds

When you import a Web page in PDF format, EagleFiler usually preserves the background¹³⁸ so that
the page looks like it does in the browser. You can also set EagleFiler to use a blank page 
background¹³⁹.
This is especially useful in combination with setting the MediaStylePDF to print.

PlayCaptureSound

When you press the capture key, EagleFiler can either play a sound¹⁴⁰ or be silent¹⁴¹.

PrefersRichText

Normally when you create a new file via the EagleFiler: Import service, Import From Clipboard,
drag and drop, or New Record ▷ From Clipboard EagleFiler creates an RTF or RTFD¹⁴² file. You can
instead set it to create plain text¹⁴³ files.

RecordsListHasAlternatingBackground

This controls whether EagleFiler uses a solid white background¹⁴⁴ or blue-and-white¹⁴⁵ alternating
row background colors in the records list.

RecordsListShowToolTips

This controls whether EagleFiler shows tooltips¹⁴⁶ or not¹⁴⁷ when you hover over an item in the 
records
list.

RecordsListLabelPreferTitle

Normally, EagleFiler indicates a record’s label by showing a colored circle in the File column¹⁴⁸. 
You
can also set it to use the Title column¹⁴⁹ instead.

¹³²x-eaglefiler://default?k=OldApplicationIcon&v=YES
¹³³x-eaglefiler://default?k=OldApplicationIcon&v=NO
¹³⁴x-eaglefiler://default?k=OldApplicationIcon1.5&v=YES
¹³⁵x-eaglefiler://default?k=OldApplicationIcon1.5&v=NO

¹³⁶x-eaglefiler://default?k=OpenEagleFilerURLsInNewWindow&v=NO
¹³⁷x-eaglefiler://default?k=OpenEagleFilerURLsInNewWindow&v=YES
¹³⁸x-eaglefiler://default?k=PDFWebBackgrounds&v=YES

¹³⁹x-eaglefiler://default?k=PDFWebBackgrounds&v=NO
¹⁴⁰x-eaglefiler://default?k=PlayCaptureSound&v=YES
¹⁴¹x-eaglefiler://default?k=PlayCaptureSound&v=NO
¹⁴²x-eaglefiler://default?k=PrefersRichText&v=YES
¹⁴³x-eaglefiler://default?k=PrefersRichText&v=NO

¹⁴⁴x-eaglefiler://default?k=RecordsListHasAlternatingBackground&v=NO
¹⁴⁵x-eaglefiler://default?k=RecordsListHasAlternatingBackground&v=YES
¹⁴⁶x-eaglefiler://default?k=RecordsListShowToolTips&v=YES

¹⁴⁷x-eaglefiler://default?k=RecordsListShowToolTips&v=NO
¹⁴⁸x-eaglefiler://default?k=RecordsListLabelPreferTitle&v=NO

¹⁴⁹x-eaglefiler://default?k=RecordsListLabelPreferTitle&v=YES

130


RecordsListLabelUnderlineStyle

Normally, EagleFiler indicates a record’s label by showing a colored circle¹⁵⁰ in the File or Title
column (like Finder does). You can also set it to additionally underline the filename and title¹⁵¹, 
to
make the color stand out more.

RespectImageDPI

When displaying images and rich text files, EagleFiler normally uses the resolution specified in 
each
image file¹⁵². Some images have an incorrect resolution setting (e.g. set to 300 DPI but intended to
be  72 DPI), which can make them appear very small on screen. Therefore, EagleFiler lets you 
override
the image’s resolution¹⁵³ to display all the pixels. This can “fix” the display for incorrect image 
files,
however it will make legitimately high-resolution images appear much too large. The best solution is
to   fix the resolution in the image files themselves.

RevealInLibraryNewWindow

Normally the Reveal in Library button in the Errors window selects the record in an existing
window¹⁵⁴, which can be a lot faster if you’re going through lots of “Missing File” errors. You can 
also
set     it to open a new window¹⁵⁵, so that you don’t lose your place.

ScanForNewFilesOnOpen

EagleFiler normally scans for new files when the library is opened¹⁵⁶. You can turn this off¹⁵⁷ so 
that
it only scans for new files when you use the menu command.

SendsWholeSearchString

Normally EagleFiler updates the search results as you type¹⁵⁸. If you are a slow typer, it may do 
this
after each letter, causing the search to take a long time. You can instead set EagleFiler to only 
do the
search once, when you press Return¹⁵⁹.

ShowImagesInMessages

Normally EagleFiler will show images in HTML e-mails¹⁶⁰, but you can also tell it to not load 
them¹⁶¹
if you’re concerned about Web bugs.

SourcesRowSizeStyle

Normally EagleFiler will set the sources icon and font sizes based on¹⁶² the Sidebar icon size pop-
up menu in the General tab of System Settings. You can also override it to always be small¹⁶³,
medium¹⁶⁴, or large¹⁶⁵.

TagCommentPrefix

¹⁵⁰x-eaglefiler://default?k=RecordsListLabelUnderlineStyle&v=0
¹⁵¹x-eaglefiler://default?k=RecordsListLabelUnderlineStyle&v=2
¹⁵²x-eaglefiler://default?k=RespectImageDPI&v=YES

¹⁵³x-eaglefiler://default?k=RespectImageDPI&v=NO

¹⁵⁴x-eaglefiler://default?k=RevealInLibraryNewWindow&v=NO
¹⁵⁵x-eaglefiler://default?k=RevealInLibraryNewWindow&v=YES
¹⁵⁶x-eaglefiler://default?k=ScanForNewFilesOnOpen&v=YES
¹⁵⁷x-eaglefiler://default?k=ScanForNewFilesOnOpen&v=NO
¹⁵⁸x-eaglefiler://default?k=SendsWholeSearchString&v=NO
¹⁵⁹x-eaglefiler://default?k=SendsWholeSearchString&v=YES
¹⁶⁰x-eaglefiler://default?k=ShowImagesInMessages&v=YES
¹⁶¹x-eaglefiler://default?k=ShowImagesInMessages&v=NO

¹⁶²x-eaglefiler://default?k=SourcesRowSizeStyle&delete=1
¹⁶³x-eaglefiler://default?k=SourcesRowSizeStyle&v=1

¹⁶⁴x-eaglefiler://default?k=SourcesRowSizeStyle&v=2
¹⁶⁵x-eaglefiler://default?k=SourcesRowSizeStyle&v=3

131


If a record is tagged unread and flagged EagleFiler will normally set the Spotlight comments to
&flagged &unread. This allows for integration with other applications that follow this convention,
and it lets you use Spotlight to search for files with particular tags. You can set it to use no 
prefix¹⁶⁶
so that it instead sets the comments to flagged unread or set the prefix to “&”¹⁶⁷ to go back to the
default.

TextInspectorBar

Normally EagleFiler shows¹⁶⁸ the text editing toolbar as needed. You can also set it to never 
show¹⁶⁹.
This is the default on macOS 10.12.0–10.12.1 in order to work around a crashing bug.

TextInspectorBarStayOpen

Normally EagleFiler shows and hides¹⁷⁰ the text editing toolbar as needed. You can also set it to 
stay
visible¹⁷¹ if you prefer not to see the window resize when you view different types of records.

UseOpenMetaRecentsForCompletion

EagleFiler can use a global list¹⁷² of recently used tags to use for auto-completion. By default, 
however,
only tags in the current library¹⁷³ are offered as suggested completions.

WordXRecordDisplayUsingQuickLook

EagleFiler normally uses the system text engine¹⁷⁴ to display .docx files, as this lets you select 
text
and use the Find panel. You can also tell EagleFiler to use Quick Look¹⁷⁵ in the record viewer, 
which
may provide a more realistic preview for documents with complex formatting. (Quick Look is always
available in a separate window, via the Quick Look menu command.)

Experimental Options
PlainTextForegroundColor/PlainTextBackgroundColor

You can change the colors EagleFiler uses to display plain text files. For example, to get green 
text on
a black background you could enter these commands into Terminal:

defaults write com.c-command.EagleFiler PlainTextForegroundColor -array 0 .4 .1 1

defaults write com.c-command.EagleFiler PlainTextBackgroundColor -array 0 0 0 1

The colors are specified as RGBA values. To return to the default colors:

defaults delete com.c-command.EagleFiler PlainTextForegroundColor
defaults delete com.c-command.EagleFiler PlainTextBackgroundColor

NewPlainTextExtension

This lets you change the extension of new plain text files that EagleFiler creates on your behalf. 
For
example, you could change it from the default txt to md to create Markdown files:

defaults write com.c-command.EagleFiler NewPlainTextExtension md

¹⁶⁶x-eaglefiler://default?k=TagCommentPrefix&v=
¹⁶⁷x-eaglefiler://default?k=TagCommentPrefix&v=%26
¹⁶⁸x-eaglefiler://default?k=TextInspectorBar&v=YES
¹⁶⁹x-eaglefiler://default?k=TextInspectorBar&v=NO

¹⁷⁰x-eaglefiler://default?k=TextInspectorBarStayOpen&v=NO
¹⁷¹x-eaglefiler://default?k=TextInspectorBarStayOpen&v=YES

¹⁷²x-eaglefiler://default?k=UseOpenMetaRecentsForCompletion&v=YES
¹⁷³x-eaglefiler://default?k=UseOpenMetaRecentsForCompletion&v=NO
¹⁷⁴x-eaglefiler://default?k=WordXRecordDisplayUsingQuickLook&v=NO
¹⁷⁵x-eaglefiler://default?k=WordXRecordDisplayUsingQuickLook&v=YES

132


7  Extending EagleFiler

7.1  AppleScripting EagleFiler

EagleFiler has extensive support for AppleScript so that you can automate it and integrate it with 
other
applications. The EagleFiler AppleScripts page has a collection of sample scripts that are useful 
in their
own right and that can also be used as templates for developing your own scripts.

Running AppleScripts From EagleFiler’s Script Menu

By using macOS’s script menu, you can make AppleScripts available from inside EagleFiler as if they 
were
built-in commands. To enable the script menu, open the Script Editor application in the Utilities 
folder.
In  the settings window, make sure that Show Script menu in menu bar is checked.

The menu will appear at the right side of your menu bar, near the clock. To add commands to the 
menu,
switch to EagleFiler and choose Open Scripts Folder ▷ Open EagleFiler Scripts Folder. This will

133


open a special folder in the Finder; every script file that you put in this folder will show up in 
EagleFiler’s
script menu.

To run a script, just select the menu command with your mouse. If you need additional script menu 
features
such as keyboard shortcuts, try Red Sweater Software’s FastScripts¹⁷⁶.

Leaning AppleScript

For more information about AppleScript, see Apple’s AppleScript Language Guide¹⁷⁷, AppleScript: The
Definitive Guide¹⁷⁸ by Matt Neuburg, or AppleScript 1-2-3¹⁷⁹ by Sal Soghoian and Bill Cheeseman.

7.2  Writing Capture Scripts

You can extend EagleFiler’s capture key to support additional applications by adding capture 
scripts to the
folder:

/Users/<username>/Library/Application Support/EagleFiler/Capture Scripts/

¹⁷⁶http://www.red-sweater.com/fastscripts/
¹⁷⁷http://developer.apple.com/library/mac/#documentation/AppleScript/Conceptual/AppleScriptLangGuide
/introduction/ASLR intro.ht
¹⁷⁸http://oreilly.com/catalog/9780596102111

¹⁷⁹http://www.peachpit.com/store/product.aspx?isbn=0321149319

134


(See How can I open the Library folder?.) A capture script is an AppleScript saved in compiled 
format.
The name of the file is of the form <bundle identifier>.scpt, e.g. com.apple.Safari.scpt. You can
determine an application’s bundle identifier by finding the CFBundleIdentifier in the Info.plist 
file
inside the application’s package (which you can open using the Show Package Contents command when
Control-clicking on the application).

The script should have a handler called capture that returns a list of AppleScript records. Each 
record in
the list should have a |url| key (for a remote http URL) or a |path| key (for a full POSIX path). 
If no
items are available for capture, the script can return the empty list, or it can return a record 
with a |error|
key that provides an application-specific error message.

Other, optional, keys are:

|deleteWhenDone|

If the script creates a temporary file for the capture, it can include this key with value true so 
that
EagleFiler will delete the temporary file after it has finished importing the file.

|fromName|

Overrides the From name that would be extracted from the file.

|note|

A string for the note text.

|sourceURL|

The URL that the document was downloaded from.

|tags|

A list of tag names.

|tagsString|

A Unicode string of space-separated tag names, which EagleFiler will parse.

|title|

Overrides the title that would be extracted from the file.

|creationDate|

Sets the creation date of the file.

|modificationDate|

Sets the modification date of the file.

|webPageFormat|

Overrides the format chosen in EagleFiler’s settings. Must be one of: html, pdf, pdfSinglePage, rtf,
rtfd, txt, webarchive, webloc.

Example: NetNewsWire

The NetNewsWire 3 capture script looks like:

135


on capture()

tell application "NetNewsWire"

set tabIndex to index of selected tab
set tagNames to {}

set title to ""
set note to ""

if tabIndex is 0 then

if exists selectedHeadline then

set url to URL of selectedHeadline
set title to title of selectedHeadline
try


else

get title
on error

set title to ""
end try

if isFlagged of selectedHeadline then
set tagNames to {"flagged"}

end if

return {{|error|:"No URL is available to be captured."}}

end if
else

set urls to URLs of tabs
try

set url to item ( tabIndex + 1) of urls
set titles to titles of tabs

set title to item ( tabIndex + 1) of titles
try

set note to do JavaScript "window.getSelection().toString()"
end try

on error

return {{|error|:"EagleFiler could not access the current tab due to a bug in NetNewsWire. Please t
end try

end if
end tell

return {{|url|: url, tags: tagNames, title: title, |note|: note}}

end capture

Example: Finder

The capture script for the Finder demonstrates how to capture multiple items at once:

on capture()

tell application "Finder"

set theSelection to selection as list
set theResult to {}

repeat with theFile in theSelection
set theFile to theFile as alias

copy {|path|:POSIX path of theFile} to end of theResult

end repeat
return theResult

end tell
end capture

136


7.3  Writing Stationery Scripts

The New Record ▷ Open Stationery Folder section describes the basics of EagleFiler’s stationery 
feature. You
can also write stationery AppleScripts to set the filename and metadata. This provides more 
control—for
example, you can set a title that’s distinct from the filename. It also lets you set the metadata 
dynamically—
that  is, it can be determined when making new records from the stationery rather than when the 
stationery
is first created. Therefore, the metadata can be based on the current date, the current user, the 
current
iTunes track or chat status, or any other information that’s accessible via AppleScript.

Where to Put Stationery Scripts

To set the metadata via AppleScript, create a compiled script file next to your stationery file.  
If the
stationery file is Journal Entry.rtf, the script should be called Journal Entry.efmeta.scpt. 
EagleFiler
will automatically run the script when you create a new record from the Journal Entry.rtf 
stationery.

Example Stationery Script

Here’s an example script:

on metadata( context)

set title to "Blog Entry"

set base to do shell script "date ’+%A, %B %d, %Y’"
set systemInfo to system info

set from to long user name of systemInfo
set tags to {"journal", "draft"}

return {|title|: title, |basename|: base, |fromName|: from, |tags|: tags}
end metadata

This would set the title to “Blog Entry”, the filename would be based on the current date (e.g. 
“Tuesday,
October 21, 2008.rtf”), the from would be the name of the user logged into the Mac (e.g. “John 
Appleseed”),
and the tags would be “journal” and “draft”.

Stationery Script Details

The script should contain a handler called metadata with a single context parameter.

The context is an AppleScript record containing the following keys: |folderName|, |libaryPath|, 
|stationeryBasename|,

|stationeryName|, and |stationeryPath|. The script can ignore the context, or it can use it to find 
out
about the stationery file and where the record will be created.

The metadata handler should return an AppleScript record containing one or more of the following 
keys:

|basename|, |fromName|, |note|, |sourceURL|, |tags|, |title|.

8  Frequently Asked Questions (FAQ)

8.1  How can I access my library from multiple Macs?

There are several different ways of sharing an EagleFiler library among multiple Macs.  Most of 
these
techniques will also work for sharing your files with a Windows PC or iOS device. You can either 
create a

137


new library in the shared location or close your library and then move the entire library folder.

Rules for Shared Libraries

• Always copy or sync the entire EagleFiler library folder. This will ensure that your files and 
notes,
and EagleFiler’s database and search indexes, are all shared.

• Only open the library in one copy of EagleFiler at a time. Multiple copies of EagleFiler 
simultaneously
using the same database can damage it. (If this does happen, you can easily rebuild the library.)

• It’s safe to use the Finder and other applications to browse and edit the files in your library 
from
multiple devices simultaneously. Just make sure that you follow the rules for library folders.

• You can add new files to the library from any device, without having to open EagleFiler. Just 
save the
files into the The To Import Folder or The Files Folder.

• Some of the cloud services below do not preserve metadata such as file creation dates, labels, or 
Finder
tags. Lack of support for tags is not a problem for EagleFiler because EagleFiler has its own tag
storage and will restore any Finder tags that were lost. If creation dates or labels are important 
to
you, you should choose a service that supports them or use an encrypted library.

Ways of Sharing That Have Been Tested With EagleFiler

• You can store your library on a portable drive, e.g. a USB keychain drive, SD card, external hard
drive, iPhone, iPad, or iPod. See also the How can I put my library on my iPhone? page.

• Dropbox¹⁸⁰ is a free service for sharing files between Macs and accessing them from the Web or an
iPhone or iPad. It is the recommended cloud storage for use with EagleFiler.

After editing your library with one Mac, make sure that both it and the second Mac have fully synced
with the Dropbox server (that is, the icon in the menubar no longer shows spinning arrows) before
opening the library on the second Mac.

We recommend not using Dropbox’s Smart Sync feature, which avoids downloading all the files to your
Mac, as this can cause extra indexing and syncing.

If you only want to put part of your library on Dropbox, see the Aliases and Symlinks part of the
Library Folders section of the manual.

Note: Dropbox does not preserve the colored labels or creation dates of files unless you are using 
an
encrypted library. It also places limitations on which filename characters you can use. It does 
preserve
Apple (but not third-party) extended attributes.

• Box is a Dropbox-like service. Like Dropbox, you must wait for it to finish syncing before 
opening a
library or shutting down your Mac.

Note: Box does not preserve file metadata such as colored labels or extended attributes. Box places
limitations on the filename characters you can use.

• Google Drive (a.k.a. Google One) is a Dropbox-like service that also supports full-text 
searching. Like
Dropbox, you must wait for it to finish syncing before opening a library or shutting down your Mac.

Note: Google Drive does not preserve file metadata such as creation dates, colored labels, or 
extended
attributes. Google does not document which filename characters you can use.

¹⁸⁰http://www.dropbox.com

138


• iCloud Drive is a Dropbox-like service. Like Dropbox, you must wait for it to finish syncing 
before
opening a library or shutting down your Mac. Unlike Dropbox, it is hard to know¹⁸¹ when syncing has
finished because there is a separate progress indicator for each file, rather than one global menu. 
The
iCloudStatus¹⁸² utility can help with this, but it is still possible to corrupt your library if you 
modify
it    before iCloud has finished syncing changes from another device.

Note: On macOS 10.12 Sierra, iCloud Drive automatically syncs the contents of the Desktop and
Documents folders, unless you disable this in the iCloud pane in System Settings. If you do not want
your EagleFiler libraries synced, disable that feature or move the libraries to another folders. 
Also, you
should make sure that Optimize Mac Storage is unchecked. (On macOS 10.15 and later, this located
in System Settings ▷ Apple ID ▷ iCloud.) Otherwise, the system may delete the local copies of
some of your EagleFiler files, leading to errors and EagleFiler thinking that they are missing.

Note: iCloud Drive preserves file creation dates but not other file metadata such as colored labels 
or
extended attributes (except for Finder tags). Apple does not document which filename characters you
can use.

• Microsoft OneDrive is a Dropbox-like service. Like Dropbox, you must wait for it to finish syncing
before opening a library or shutting down your Mac.

OneDrive has severe¹⁸³ path¹⁸⁴ length and filename character limitations. We offer scripts to rename
files with allowed characters and to shorten long filenames.

Note: OneDrive does not preserve file metadata such as colored labels or extended attributes. Thus,
it is not recommended for use with EagleFiler.

• OmniPresence¹⁸⁵ is a Dropbox-like service that can also work with your own WebDAV server. Like
Dropbox, you must wait for it to finish syncing before opening a library or shutting down your Mac.

Note: OmniPresence does not preserve file metadata such as colored labels or extended attributes.

• OwnCloud and NextCloud are Dropbox-like cloud syncing services that you can host yourself.

Note: OwnCloud and NextCloud do not preserve file metadata such as creation dates, colored labels,
or extended attributes.

• Resilio Sync is a Dropbox-like service that can sync files between Macs without storing them in 
the
cloud. It is recommended that you whitelist the com.c-command.eaglefiler.tags.sync-info xattr
and set the folder Temporary Items.nobackup to be ignored.

Note: Resilio Sync does support extended attributes.

• SugarSync¹⁸⁶ is a free service for sharing files between Macs and accessing them from the Web or 
an
iPhone or iPad. After editing your library with one Mac, make sure that both it and the second Mac
have fully synced with the server before opening the library on the second Mac.

Note: SugarSync currently has limited support for Mac files.  It do not support¹⁸⁷ resource forks,
extended attributes, bundle bits, or other HFS metadata.  SugarSync does not support filenames
containing : at the Unix level (/ in the Finder). EagleFiler does not require support for this 
metadata.
However, you should be aware that if you set file labels or custom icons, these will be lost when 
syncing
with SugarSync. Additionally, if you use EagleFiler to organize files that contain resource forks 
(such
as some sound or font files, old NisusWriter files, etc.) they will become unusable after syncing. 
If

¹⁸¹http://apple.stackexchange.com/q/151421/2121
¹⁸²http://www.thealchemistguild.com/icloudstatus/
¹⁸³http://windows.microsoft.com/en-us/onedrive/troubleshoot-sync-problems/windows81
¹⁸⁴http://ignorethecode.net/blog/2014/11/05/onedrive/
¹⁸⁵http://www.omnigroup.com/omnipresence/

¹⁸⁶http://www.sugarsync.com
¹⁸⁷http://support.sugarsync.com/ics/support/default.asp?deptID=4579&task=knowledge&questionID=361

139


you have detailed knowledge of what kind of metadata your files have, and whether it needs to be
preserved, you can decide for yourself whether or not this is a problem for you. If in doubt, you 
should
use an encrypted library (see below).

• Sync is a Dropbox-like service with a focus on security.

Note: Sync does not preserve file metadata such as colored labels or extended attributes.

• Transporter¹⁸⁸ is a Dropbox-like service except that the data is stored on your own hardware. Like
Dropbox, you must wait for it to finish syncing before opening a library or shutting down your Mac.

Note: Transporter has many metadata and filename limitations.

• macOS’s built-in file sharing and Web sharing can be used to make your library available on other
Macs. Just make sure that the library folder is stored in a folder that’s set up for file sharing 
(e.g.
Public) or Web sharing (e.g. Sites) and that sharing is enabled in System Settings.

Accessing a library over the network via file sharing is generally slower than using an Dropbox.

• You can use a non-cloud file syncing utility such as Synchronize! Pro X¹⁸⁹, ChronoSync¹⁹⁰, or Su-
perDuper¹⁹¹. There is more information about this in the Syncing a Library Locally section.

Encrypted Libraries

If you use the New Library. . . command create an encrypted EagleFiler library, EagleFiler will 
wrap up your
library and all its files into a disk image that preserves all the metadata. Be sure to eject the 
disk image
after closing the library in EagleFiler. This causes the OS to save all the information to disk so 
that it can
be synced properly. (You can use the Close & Lock command to do this in one step.)

Note: Encrypted libraries can only be accessed from a Mac, not from the Web or an iPhone or iPad.

8.2  How can I put my library on my iPhone?

EagleFiler stores your files in standard formats, and iOS can read most of them. There are several 
different
ways to store your library so that it can be shared between a Mac, iPhone, iPad, and iPod touch:

Cloud Storage

You can store your EagleFiler library in the cloud. These apps let you access storage from a 
provider such
as Dropbox or iCloud Drive, with support for many file types:

• Files (built into iOS 11) supports iCloud Drive and can connect to Dropbox and other services if 
those
apps are installed. It lets you view files by tag and also assign and unassign tags to files. This 
works
better with files in iCloud Drive than in Dropbox. Recommended.

• Readdle Documents can do full content searching of text, HTML, iWork, Microsoft Office, PDF, and
RTF files. You can manually download select files or folders or set an entire library to 
automatically
sync between the iPhone and the cloud. Recommended.

¹⁸⁸http://www.filetransporter.com
¹⁸⁹http://www.qdea.com/synchronize pro x intro.html
¹⁹⁰http://www.econtechnologies.com/chronosync/overview.html

¹⁹¹http://www.shirt-pocket.com/SuperDuper/SuperDuperDescription.html

140


• Working Copy uses Git to synchronize with files stored on a cloud provider or your own server. It
supports searching and editing of text files and can display lots of file types. Recommended.

• GoodReader¹⁹² can view many types of files and can search text and PDF files.

• If you have Dropbox for Business, the iOS app supports full text search without downloading all 
the
files.

These apps focus on supporting plain text files:

• 1Writer¹⁹³ is a Markdown text editor that can directly edit and search files in EagleFiler 
libraries that
are stored in Dropbox or iCloud Drive. Recommended.

• iA Writer. Recommended.

• Editorial¹⁹⁴ can do full content searching (as well as editing) of text files. Recommended.

• Byword

• Droptext¹⁹⁵

• Textastic

• See also the iOS Text Editor roundup¹⁹⁶.

These apps support editing rich text files:

• TextEditor

• RichTexture

The How can I access my library from multiple Macs? section lists a variety of services such as 
Dropbox¹⁹⁷
and Google Drive that provide both cloud storage and an iPhone app for viewing your files in the 
cloud.

Device Storage

You can store your EagleFiler library directly on the iPhone and share it with your Mac (via Wi-Fi) 
using
one of these apps:

• Air Sharing¹⁹⁸

• GoodReader¹⁹⁹

• Readdle Documents

¹⁹²http://www.goodreader.com
¹⁹³http://1writerapp.com
¹⁹⁴http://omz-software.com/editorial/

¹⁹⁵http://itunes.apple.com/us/app/droptext/id371880635?mt=8&at=10l6nc&ct=droptext
¹⁹⁶http://brettterpstra.com/ios-text-editors/

¹⁹⁷http://www.dropbox.com/iphoneapp
¹⁹⁸http://avatron.com/applications/air-sharing/
¹⁹⁹http://goodreader.com

141


Other

• easySearch provides full text searching for a variety of document formats.

• SyncBook²⁰⁰ is a pair of Mac and iPhone apps for viewing and editing notes. It can integrate with
EagleFiler via a symlink.

Importing From iOS to EagleFiler
Please see the Importing From iOS section.
Encryption

Note that encrypted libraries can be stored in the cloud but can only be natively accessed from a 
Mac, not
from the Web, an iPhone, or an iPad. Many cloud providers do keep your files encrypted on their 
servers,
however. There is a third-party app called Disk Decipher that allows access to encrypted libraries 
from iOS.

8.3  How can I encrypt my files?

EagleFiler supports encryption at the library level. You can have multiple libraries, each of which 
is either
encrypted or not encrypted. An encrypted library works just like a normal library except that all 
aspects of
it    (the files, notes, metadata, search indexes, and temporary files) are unreadable until the 
proper passphrase
has been entered. Each encrypted library can have a different passphrase.

When creating a New Library. . ., the Encrypt library using passphrase option lets you store the 
library
on an encrypted disk image. The entire library (including all the files, notes, and indexes) will 
be stored in
a disk image file that is encrypted using AES-128 or AES-256²⁰¹.

You can choose the format and encryption level of the disk image:

Sparse Disk Image

Creates a .sparseimage file that’s compatible with macOS 10.4 and later.

Sparse Bundle Disk Image

Creates a .sparsebundle package that requires macOS 10.5 or later, but which is much more efficient
for backups. Note: macOS does not support sparse bundle disk images on certain volume types, so in
those cases you would need to use a sparse disk image even if you have a recent version of macOS.

128-bit AES Encryption

Compatible with macOS 10.4 or later.

256-bit AES Encryption

Requires macOS 10.5 or later. It is slower but even more secure than AES-128.

Maximum Library Size

²⁰⁰http://itunes.apple.com/us/app/syncbook/id290800829?mt=8&at=10l6nc&ct=syncbook
²⁰¹http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Advanced Encryption Standard#Security of AES

142


An encrypted library will only consume the amount of disk space needed to hold its files, indexes, 
and
temporary files. However, you must set a maximum library size that controls how large the library 
can grow.
The larger the maximum size, the more overhead there is for encryption. For example, a library with 
a 1
GB maximum size will have about 26 MB of overhead, while a library with 500 GB maximum size will 
have
about 111 MB of overhead.

If your library reaches the maximum size, you can resize the disk image or create a new, larger 
library and
copy all of the files to it by following the instructions in the How can I rebuild a library? 
section.

Opening an Encrypted Library

To access the library, double-click the disk image file and enter the library’s passphrase. The 
library will
appear as a white icon on your desktop, and you can double-click the .eflibrary file to open it in 
EagleFiler.
(You can also access all the files in the library directly from the Finder.) When you’re done with 
the library,
close it in EagleFiler and eject the library from your desktop to lock it again. Now it can only be 
accessed
by people who know the passphrase. For more information, please see the Open Library. . . section.

When you’re done using an encrypted library, choose Close & Lock from the File menu.

Changing the Passphrase

To change the passphrase of an encrypted library, first close and eject the library.  The 
passphrase of
the .sparseimage or .sparsebundle file can be changed using DropDMG’s Change Image Passphrase. . .
command.

(There is also a Change Password command in macOS’s Disk Utility, but it doesn’t seem to work on
macOS 10.14 through 11.0. The hdiutil command in Terminal does work.)

Compacting an Encrypted Library

If you’ve removed files from an encrypted library, you can reclaim space on your hard disk by using
DropDMG’s Compact Image... command to on the .sparseimage or .sparsebundle file.

Notification Center and Privacy

EagleFiler normally posts to the system Notification Center when it has finished importing a batch 
of files.
If your encrypted library contains files with sensitive names, you may wish to disable this feature 
so that
the filenames are not visible in Notification Center or stored in its database. For more 
information, see
DisableNotificationCenter in the esoteric preferences.

8.4  Where is my EagleFiler library?

There is no standard location for EagleFiler libraries. The library is stored in the folder that 
you chose when
you used the New Library. . . command. Most people choose their Documents folder.

Normally, you don’t have to manually open your EagleFiler library. If Remember open libraries 
between
launches is checked in the settings, when you quit EagleFiler (with a library window open), 
EagleFiler will
automatically reopen it the next time you relaunch EagleFiler.

You can also re-open recent libraries using the File ▷ Open Recent command, the pop-up menu in the
Drop Pad, or The Dock Menu.

143


If you library does not appear in the list of recents, you can find all your libraries by doing a 
search in the
Finder for:

filename:.eflibrary

To move your library, please see the Library Folders section of the manual.

8.5  How can I rebuild a library?

An EagleFiler library might not open because the database file was corrupted by a crash or hardware 
failure.
Or, the library may open, but it may have lots of missing files due to not following the rules for 
library
folders. In such cases, your files are still there, and your metadata is available in EagleFiler’s 
XML backup.
It   is a simple matter to create a fresh EagleFiler library:

Rebuilding a Regular Library

1. Close the library in EagleFiler.

2. In the Finder, rename the library folder that contains your .eflibrary file, putting Old at the
end of the name. (To find your library’s folder, see the Where is my EagleFiler library? section.)

3. Use the New Library. . . command to create a new library with the same name and location as
the original library folder (so that the two library folders end up next to each other).

4. Close the library in EagleFiler.

5. In the Finder, drag the old library’s Files folder into the new library’s folder, replacing the
folder with the same name.

6. Open the new library in EagleFiler and wait until it finishes scanning for new files. This may
take several minutes.

7. Close the library.

8. In the Finder, drag the old library’s Smart Folders folder into the new library’s folder, 
replacing
the folder with the same name.

9. In the Finder, delete the old library’s folder.

10. When you re-open the new library, you can browse and view your files right away. It may take
a while for EagleFiler to reindex all the files. (See the How does indexing in EagleFiler work?
section.)

Rebuilding an Encrypted Library

1. Close & Lock the library in EagleFiler.

2. In the Finder, rename the library’s disk image (the .sparsebundle or .sparseimage file), putting

Old at the end of the name.

3. Use the New Library. . . command to create a new encrypted library with the same name and
location as the original library (so that the two disk images end up next to each other).

144


4. Close the library in EagleFiler, but keep the disk image mounted, and mount the disk image for
the old library.

5. In the Finder, drag the old library’s Files folder into the new library’s mounted disk image,
replacing the folder with the same name.

6. Open the new library in EagleFiler and wait until it finishes scanning for new files. This may
take several minutes.

7. Close the library.

8. In the Finder, drag the old library’s Smart Folders folder into the new library’s mounted disk
image, replacing the folder with the same name.

9. Eject the old library’s disk image in the Finder, and then delete the disk image file.

10. When you re-open the new library, you can browse and view your files right away. It may take
a while for EagleFiler to reindex all the files. (See the How does indexing in EagleFiler work?
section.)

8.6  How can I run optical character recognition (OCR) on my PDFs?

If you’re trying to run a paperless office, the first step is getting your papers scanned into your 
Mac.

• We recommend Fujitsu ScanSnap scanners as the easiest way to create a multi-page PDF from a stack
of papers. The ScanSnap software has a built-in OCR feature, as described in the Importing From a
Scanner section.

• ExactScan²⁰² and ViewScan also offer software that can perform OCR and works with many different
types of scanners.

• If your scanner software does not automatically do OCR, the second step is to use optical 
character
recognition (OCR)²⁰³ to make the text in the scanned PDFs searchable and selectable. The easiest
way   to do this is to use Smile Software’s PDFpen²⁰⁴ to add a text layer to your PDF. You can do 
this
directly in PDFpen, but it’s easier to automate the process via AppleScript. To do this, download 
the
OCR With PDFpen script in compiled format. There are several ways you can use this script:

EagleFiler’s script menu

Follow the instructions on the AppleScripting EagleFiler page, then save the script file into the
folder to add the OCR With PDFpen command to the script menu. Then you can simply
select PDF files in EagleFiler and choose OCR With PDFpen.

Drag and drop

Use Script Editor to save the script as an application. Then drag and drop PDF files onto it to
OCR them and then import them into EagleFiler.

Direct from the scanner

Save the script as an application and set it as the target of your scanner’s software. Instead of
having the scanner open new scans in Preview, have it open them with your script application.
The scanned files will be run through OCR and then imported into EagleFiler.

²⁰²http://www.exactscan.com
²⁰³http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Optical character recognition
²⁰⁴http://www.smilesoftware.com/PDFpen/

145


Folder action

Attach the script to a folder as a folder action and save files into that folder.

See also the Importing From a Scanner section.

8.7  How can I move messages between mailboxes?

In order to improve performance and make more efficient use of disk space, EagleFiler prefers to 
store e-mail
messages in mailbox files (using the standard “mbox” format), and it does not allow them to be 
moved from
one mailbox to another. Thus, it is best to organize messages into the mailboxes that you want (and 
to
delete messages that you don’t want to save) before importing them into EagleFiler. Nevertheless, 
several
organization options are available once your messages are in an EagleFiler library:

1. You can merge multiple mailboxes into one. For example, if each month you import mailbox
A into EagleFiler, you’ll end up with lots of A mailboxes in the library, each containing one
month’s worth of messages. By merging all of the A mailboxes into one, you can reduce visual
clutter and make EagleFiler run more efficiently.

2. You can drag messages from mailboxes to folders. This deletes the messages from the mailbox
and stores the messages as individual .eml files in the folder. This is not as efficient as storing
one file per mailbox, but it allows for more flexible organization.

3. You can organize messages (from different mailboxes) into tag sources.  As with playlists in
iTunes, each message can be in more than one tag source at a time.

4. The easiest way to avoid storing duplicate messages is to delete messages in your mail program
after you’ve imported them into EagleFiler. You can also delete individual messages from an
EagleFiler mailbox, although this will not save disk space; it will only hide the messages from
view.

8.8  How can I copy my tags to another library?

Once you’ve created some tags and set them up the way you want, it’s easy to use them in another 
library:

1. Create a new RTF file and select it.

2. Open the Tags window and check all the checkboxes to assign the desired tags to the file.

3. Drag the file into the other library.

EagleFiler will transfer the tags (along with their abbreviations, colors, and hierarchy) to the 
other library.
This is really just a special case of a general EagleFiler feature that metadata (tags, notes, 
titles, etc.) are
preserved when copying files between libraries.

146


8.9  How do Finder tags work with EagleFiler?

macOS 10.9 and later have built-in²⁰⁵ support tags in the Finder and other applications. EagleFiler 
syncs
its tags with the system automatically. Each file has the same tags in EagleFiler and the Finder, 
and the
tags are searchable in Spotlight.

Tag Syncing

• When you import a file into EagleFiler, it imports that file’s Finder tags as well.

• If you assign or unassign tags in EagleFiler, the Finder tags update right away.

• If you assign or unassign tags in the Finder, the tags update in EagleFiler when you view the 
file or
when you use the Backup Metadata command. EagleFiler also updates the tags automatically when
you open the library and periodically after it’s open.

• If you rename a tag in EagleFiler, EagleFiler renames the Finder tags on each file.

• EagleFiler’s database acts as a backup for the Finder tags, which are somewhat fragile due to the 
way
they are stored. If the Finder tags are lost (e.g. when transferring a file over a network, editing 
a
file with an application that doesn’t support tags, or backing²⁰⁶ up²⁰⁷ using a product that doesn’t
support extended attributes), EagleFiler will automatically restore the tags from the database the 
next
time you open the library.

Differences Between Tags in EagleFiler and Finder

• EagleFiler tags are supported on macOS 10.7 and later. macOS 10.7 through 10.8 do not have 
built-in
support for tags, but EagleFiler uses OpenMeta to share tags with other applications on those 
systems.
Finder tags require macOS 10.9 or later.

• EagleFiler tags can be organized into a hierarchy; Finder tags are all at the same level.

• EagleFiler tags can have abbreviation symbols (including Emoji); Finder tags do not have abbrevia-
tions.

• Each EagleFiler library has its own list of tags, so that you only see tags that are relevant to 
the task
at hand; Finder uses the same tags for the whole Mac.

• EagleFiler tags can have any color; Finder tags have a fixed set of seven available colors. 
EagleFiler
does not sync its tag colors with Finder.

• EagleFiler has separate controls for setting a file’s colored label and its tags; Finder changes 
the label
color when you change the tags.

• EagleFiler does not allow certain characters in tag names; any Finder tags that use such 
characters will
be converted to valid EagleFiler tag names. Allowed characters include letters and numbers, spaces,
and basic punctuation.

• EagleFiler lets you create multiple tags whose names differ only by case; Finder does not, so 
such tags
will not be visible in the Finder.

²⁰⁵http://www.apple.com/osx/whats-new/#tags
²⁰⁶http://www.takecontrolbooks.com/resources/0014/online.html
²⁰⁷http://www.n8gray.org/blog/2007/04/27/introducing-backup-bouncer/

147


• EagleFiler always shows tags in alphabetical order.

Disabling Tag Syncing

Some people prefer not to sync their EagleFiler tags to the Finder. Syncing takes time, which may 
not be
worth it if you rarely use tags in other applications. Or, you may prefer not to see your 
EagleFiler tag names
when adding tags in the Finder if you only use those tags in EagleFiler.

To disable tag syncing for all libraries, click here²⁰⁸. To re-enable tag syncing, click here²⁰⁹.

You can also disable tag syncing only for certain libraries by specifying their filenames (without 
the .eflibrary)
using this Terminal command:

defaults write com.c-command.EagleFiler DisableTagSyncingForLibraryNames -array "MyLibrary" 
"SecretLibrary"

8.10  How does indexing in EagleFiler work?

EagleFiler maintains indexes in order to quickly search the contents of your library. EagleFiler 
can search
thousands of records in a fraction of a second since it only needs to read the optimized index 
files, not the
files  for each individual record. The types of searches and their syntax are described in the 
Searching section.
Normally, indexing is not something that you need to worry about, since EagleFiler handles it 
automatically.
This section describes how indexing works in case you need to customize it or fix a problem.

What’s Indexed

EagleFiler indexes the text contents of all the files, e-mail messages, and notes in your library. 
This includes
text that Spotlight wouldn’t see, such as files attached to e-mail messages, invisible Web content, 
PDF
annotations, and Skim²¹⁰ notes attached to PDF files. EagleFiler has built-in support for indexing 
common
file formats. It also supports custom file formats via Spotlight importer plug-ins.

Index Storage

As shown in the Library Folders section, each EagleFiler library has a .eflibrary package. The 
indexes for
the library are stored inside this package. This means that:

• If the library is encrypted, the indexes are as well.

• The indexes are always with the library. Unlike Spotlight, EagleFiler indexes do not need to be 
rebuilt
when files are copied or synced from one Mac to another.

• The indexes do not need to be rebuilt when restoring from a backup.

• Searching is faster than with Spotlight since EagleFiler only has to search the index for your 
library,
rather than the index for your whole hard drive.

You may prefer to exclude EagleFiler’s indexes from backups in order to save disk space or 
bandwidth. To
exclude the indexes from Time Machine backups, use the ExcludeIndexesFromBackup option in the 
Esoteric

²⁰⁸x-eaglefiler://default?k=DisableTagSyncing&v=YES
²⁰⁹x-eaglefiler://default?k=DisableTagSyncing&v=NO
²¹⁰http://skim-app.sourceforge.net

148


Preferences. To exclude the indexes from other types of backups, set your backup software to skip 
files whose
names end with .efindex or .efmailtoc.

Updating Indexes

In order for your searches to be accurate, EagleFiler needs to make sure that the index is updated 
whenever
the contents of a file changes:

• When you import a new file, EagleFiler indexes it automatically.

• When you edit a file in EagleFiler, it automatically reindexes that file right away.

• When you edit a file in another application and view it in EagleFiler, it also reindexes the 
file.

Each time you open a library, EagleFiler scans all of the files to make sure they are up-to-date in 
the index.
This allows EagleFiler to detect files that were modified outside of EagleFiler and also complete 
any indexing
work that was in progress when you closed the library. Usually, most of the files were already 
indexed, so
this scan does not take very long.

Mailbox files are not editable, so EagleFiler knows that the messages in them never change. Once a 
mailbox
has been completely indexed, EagleFiler marks the mailbox as done. This speeds up opening the 
library,
since EagleFiler will not have to check whether each message is up-to-date in the index. 
Additionally, the
index file is treated as read-only so that it will not need to be recopied during a backup or sync.

Word vs. Phrase Indexing

When rebuilding an index (see below) you can choose (per-library) whether EagleFiler should index 
words
or phrases. Indexing for word searches is much faster, but searching for multiple words will find 
all the
documents that contain those words anywhere in the document. Indexing for phrase searches lets you 
search
for     a group of words that appear near each other in a document, however indexing will take 
longer and the
index files will be several times as large. Phrase indexing is the default.

Rebuilding Indexes

If you hold down the Command and Option keys when opening a library, EagleFiler will show the 
Rebuild
Indexes dialog. When you rebuild an index, EagleFiler deletes the old index file and builds a new 
one from
scratch. This may take a long time, but it can be useful because:

• If the index was damaged, it will be replaced by a fresh index. A damaged index can cause indexing
to hang, cause EagleFiler to crash when searching, or prevent searches from finding the records that
they should.

• It compacts and defragments the index, which reduces disk usage and speeds up searches. This is
especially useful if you’ve deleted a lot of files from the library.

• All the records will be reindexed using the latest version of EagleFiler. Newer versions of 
EagleFiler
support more file formats and index the files more completely.

• It lets you switch between word and phrase indexing (see above).

Damaged Indexes

149


If EagleFiler is unable to open an index, it treats it as damaged. It will move the old index file 
to the
Damaged folder inside the Indexes folder in the .eflibrary package and log the error to Console. 
Then it
will create a new index file and begin rebuilding it.

If you believe that the index file was not actually damaged, you can close the library in 
EagleFiler and move
the index file back out of the Damaged folder. Otherwise, you can delete the files in the Damaged 
folder to
save disk space.

Excluding Files From Indexing

Occasionally, a file may be unreadable by EagleFiler or damaged such that it causes the indexer to 
hang or
crash. To prevent such files from causing problems for the rest of your library, you can exclude 
them from
indexing. You can exclude a file from indexing by assigning it the ef noindex tag.

It is also possible to exclude certain filenames and extensions from indexing, to work around buggy 
Spotlight
importers. For example, this command will exclude the file foo.xls:

defaults write com.c-command.EagleFiler SpotlightImporterSkippedNames -array-add foo.xls

and this command will exclude all .xls files:

defaults write com.c-command.EagleFiler SpotlightImporterSkippedExtensions -array-add xls

You can exclude files attached to e-mail messages from indexing by entering their names using 
Terminal.
For example, the command:

defaults write com.c-command.EagleFiler UnindexedAttachmentNames -array "smime.p7s" "PGP.sig"

will tell EagleFiler not to index files named smime.p7s or PGP.sig. The command:

defaults write com.c-command.EagleFiler UnindexedAttachmentExtensions -array dwg

will tell EagleFiler not to index files with type .dwg. This can be useful for working around a 
slow or buggy
Spotlight importer plug-in.

Either can also speed up indexing if you know that you will never want to search the contents of 
attachments
with those names.

Troubleshooting

Hangs During Indexing

If EagleFiler hangs during indexing, you can use Activity Monitor to record what EagleFiler and its 
helper
processes are doing. The eftexttool process is in charge of reading files to extract their text 
content.
The efindextool process is in charge of updating the index files for your library. (These may 
appear in
Activity Monitor as WashFramework.) Please see Sending in a “Sample” Report for more information. 
The
information in the sample report will show what EagleFiler was doing and perhaps which file it was 
working
on.

Reindexing Due to New Files Being Created

150


One case to be aware of is that if you copy your entire library (or sync it to a new Mac with 
Dropbox or
restore it from backup) the filesystem will show that the files have been touched (the “attribute 
modification
date” or “ctime” has changed), so EagleFiler will go through and reindex all of the files. However, 
the files
will be fully searchable during this reindexing because the old index entries are still in place 
until they are
updated.

To change the default behavior so that EagleFiler ignores the “attribute modification date” for 
indexing
purposes, click here²¹¹; or click here²¹² to restore it.

Unexpected Reindexing

If EagleFiler seems to be reindexing your files and you don’t know why, it may help to enable debug 
logging
to Console. For example, the log may show that certain files had never been indexed or that they 
were in
the index but had since been modified. It can also reveal when a particular file, or type of file, 
is taking a
long time to index. To enable logging for file indexing, click here²¹³; to disable it, click 
here²¹⁴. To enable
logging for message indexing, click here²¹⁵; to disable it, click here²¹⁶.

Disabling Indexing

If you want to entirely disable indexing for all files, click here²¹⁷; to re-enable it, click 
here²¹⁸.

Slow Searches or Indexing

Indexed searches in EagleFiler are normally very fast, but they can be slowed down by large numbers 
of
mailboxes, certain unusual queries, or fragmented index files.

• To enable logging for checking how fast your searches are, click here²¹⁹; to disable it, click 
here²²⁰.

• To enable logging for checking whether phrase indexing is active and how many documents are in 
each
index, click here²²¹; to disable it, click here²²².

• To enable logging for checking how fragmented the index files are, click here²²³; to disable it, 
click
here²²⁴. Note that having this option enabled will make it take longer to open or search a library.
Index files can be defragmented using a utility such as iDefrag²²⁵ or Drive Genius²²⁶.

• To record what EagleFiler is doing during a slow search, so that we can look into the cause of the
slowness, please see the Sending in a “Sample” Report section.

Not Finding Files

²¹¹x-eaglefiler://default?k=IndexingUsesAttributeModificationDate&v=NO
²¹²x-eaglefiler://default?k=IndexingUsesAttributeModificationDate&v=YES
²¹³x-eaglefiler://default?k=LogFileIndexing&v=YES

²¹⁴x-eaglefiler://default?k=LogFileIndexing&v=NO
²¹⁵x-eaglefiler://default?k=LogMessageIndexing&v=YES
²¹⁶x-eaglefiler://default?k=LogMessageIndexing&v=NO
²¹⁷x-eaglefiler://default?k=DisableIndexing&v=YES
²¹⁸x-eaglefiler://default?k=DisableIndexing&v=NO
²¹⁹x-eaglefiler://default?k=LogSearchSpeed&v=YES
²²⁰x-eaglefiler://default?k=LogSearchSpeed&v=NO

²²¹x-eaglefiler://default?k=LogIndexInfo&v=YES
²²²x-eaglefiler://default?k=LogIndexInfo&v=NO

²²³x-eaglefiler://default?k=LogIndexFragmentation&v=YES
²²⁴x-eaglefiler://default?k=LogIndexFragmentation&v=NO
²²⁵http://www.coriolis-systems.com/iDefrag.php

²²⁶http://www.prosofteng.com/products/drive genius features.php

151


If an indexed search is not finding a file that you think it should, first create a new test 
library and import
the file into it. If the file is findable in the test library, you probably just need to rebuild 
the indexes of your
main library. Otherwise, you can report²²⁷ the test library to technical support.

8.11  Why does EagleFiler import the wrong Web page when I press the capture
key?

Some Web pages cannot be loaded only by URL. These pages require session state, e.g. entering a 
password,
logging in, and then clicking a link to get to the page. When you try to capture one of these 
pages, EagleFiler
will import the site’s login page, since that’s what the server produces when EagleFiler requests 
the URL.
(An easy way to see that this has happened is to set Notification Center to show EagleFiler’s 
notifications
as banners so you can see the thumbnail preview of each Web page that you capture, to check whether 
it
looks right.)

To import these types of pages, see the Private Web Pages section.

8.12  How can I speed up EagleFiler?

Getting a faster Mac, a faster hard disk (or SSD), or more RAM would of course make everything 
faster,
but there are also some less expensive ways to speed up EagleFiler:

1. EagleFiler is designed to perform best when it is kept running, with a library open. It will be
faster to leave it running (perhaps hidden) in the background than to open and close it each time
you add a file to the library. You can easily hide EagleFiler by holding down the Option key as
you click to switch to another application. Additionally, leaving EagleFiler running will allow
you to use its capture key.

2. Importing files by dragging them directly into the library’s Files folder and then using Scan for
New Files is faster than other methods because it avoids copying the files. Also, this method (as
well as the To Import folder) do not require you to wait for EagleFiler to launch and the library
to open.

3. EagleFiler is designed to support multi-gigabyte libraries with many thousands of files. However,
as with all software, viewing a library (or folder) with fewer files in it will generally be faster
than viewing one with many. (The sizes of the files don’t have much effect on EagleFiler’s
performance.) EagleFiler lets you create multiple libraries, so one way to increase performance
is     to use several smaller libraries instead of one huge one. This can also provide an additional
level of organization.

4. Fewer large mailboxes are generally faster than many small ones. You can combine multiple
mailboxes using the Merge Mailboxes command.

5. Leave e-mail messages in their mailboxes rather than dragging them out into folders (which
converts them to individual files). You can merge .eml files back into a mailbox using the Merge
Message Files command.

6. Emptying EagleFiler’s trash will reduce the number of records in the library, and thus speed it
up.

²²⁷mailto:eaglefiler@c-command.com

152


7. Importing files is faster when nothing is selected in the source list, as many sources as 
possible
are hidden or collapsed, and the Activity window is closed.

8. In order to enable quick searching, EagleFiler maintains indexes of all the files and e-mail 
messages
in a library. By default, EagleFiler indexes for phrase searches. This allows the most flexible
searching, but indexing can take a lot of time and disk space. If you don’t need to do phrase
searches, you can rebuild the indexes for word searching. This will reduce the size of the indexes
and speed up indexing going forward. The How does indexing in EagleFiler work? section has
more information about speeding up indexing and searches.

9. Viewing search results in large documents will be faster if you turn off search match 
highlighting.

10. When EagleFiler opens a library, it checks to make sure all of the files are present, backs up 
the
metadata, and copies the tags to the Spotlight comments. You can hold down the Shift key when
opening the library to skip these steps, or click the   buttons in the Activity window to cancel
them.

11. Displaying and scrolling the records list will be faster if you tell EagleFiler not to 
calculate folder
sizes.

12. Opening a library will be faster if the selected source (when you closed the library) does not
contain many files. For example, if you had Records selected, and it was sorted by modification
date, EagleFiler would have to load all the files (and possibly all the e-mail messages) and look up
their modification dates. If a subfolder (or no source at all) were selected, the library would open
more quickly because EagleFiler would initially only have to load the contents of that folder.

13. When creating a smart folder, put the most restrictive criteria higher in the list. Use the 
Search
inside pop-up menu and checkboxes to restrict the search as much as possible.

14. Searching is faster if you tell EagleFiler to search for whole words rather than partial words, 
i.e.
uncheck Match Partial Words in the search menu.

15. Searching is faster if EagleFiler’s index files (the .efindex files inside the .eflibrary 
package)
have been defragmented using a utility such as iDefrag²²⁸.

16. Uncheck Copy tags to Spotlight comments.

8.13  Why doesn’t my serial number work?

You need to enter the serial name and serial number exactly as they appear on your order 
confirmation
e-mail. If you no longer have this e-mail, you can look up the name and number. Launch EagleFiler 
and
choose Purchase from the EagleFiler menu. Then click the Look Up My Serial Number button.

8.14  Should I download EagleFiler from this free site?

No. We only recommend downloading EagleFiler from https://c-command.com and from reputable download
sites such as Apple and MacUpdate. The C-Command Store lists all the vendors that are authorized to 
sell
EagleFiler. Downloads from other sites may include adware or viruses.

The following sites:

²²⁸http://www.coriolis-systems.com/iDefrag.php

153


DropDMG.downloads4mac.com
DropDMG.install4mac.com
DropDMG.macsoftware.com
DropDMG.onFreeDownload.com
EagleFiler.downloads4mac.com
EagleFiler.install4mac.com
EagleFiler.macsoftware.com
EagleFiler.onFreeDownload.com
SpamSieve.downloads4mac.com
SpamSieve.install4mac.com
SpamSieve.macsoftware.com
SpamSieve.onFreeDownload.com

are not authorized to distribute our software. They have been a source of confusion because they 
often appear
in ads at the top of search results for Bing, DuckDuckGo, and Yahoo. We do not recommend downloading
from these sites. In many cases, they will say that they are offering an “official” copy of 
EagleFiler that is
anything but. In fact, the installer asks for your administrator password, installs adware, and 
makes other
changes that may damage your Mac.

CNET’s Download.com offers a Direct Download Link, which is valid; however it also offers a more
prominent Download Now Installer Enabled link, which we do not recommend. The CNET installer
installs toolbar adware and changes browser settings. This page²²⁹ explains how you can remove the 
toolbar.

8.15  How can I open the Library folder?

The user library folder is stored at the path /Users/<username>/Library/. The way to access it is 
different
depending on which version of macOS you are using:

macOS 10.12.3 and Later

The Library folder is hidden by default. To open it, click on Finder in the Dock. Click on the Go 
menu at
the top of the screen, hold down the Option and Shift keys, and then choose Library. (Only one of 
Option
and Shift is needed, but due to an OS bug²³⁰, which one you need to hold down can vary. Thus, it is 
easier
to hold down both.)

Another way to access the Library folder is to choose Home from the Go menu, then type Command-
Shift-Period to show invisible files, and then open the Library folder.

Mac OS X 10.7 Through 10.12.2

The Library folder is hidden by default. To open it, click on Finder in the Dock. Click on the Go 
menu at
the top of the screen, hold down the Option key, and then choose Library.

Another option is to go to your home folder, choose View ▷ Show View Options and then make sure 
that

Show Library Folder is checked.

Mac OS X 10.6

Click on Finder in the Dock, click on the Go menu, and choose Home. This will show your home 
folder,

²²⁹https://web.archive.org/web/20151020025643/http://securemac.com/cnet adware removal guide.php

²³⁰http://robservatory.com/more-about-macos-sierra-and-library-shortcut-keys/

154


and you can open the Library folder directly.

8.16  How can I back up my EagleFiler data?

All the information for an EagleFiler library is stored in the library folder that you created when 
you used
the New Library. . . command. (See also the Where is my EagleFiler library? section.) Simply make 
sure
that your backup software is set to include your library folder. There are also various ways that 
you can
sync a library folder to the cloud.

Note: If you are using an encrypted library and want to back it up in encrypted form, you should 
instead
back up the .sparsebundle or .sparseimage file and make sure that the library is locked/ejected 
when you
do the backup.

Additionally, you should back up EagleFiler’s support files in the folder:

/Users/<username>/Library/Application Support/EagleFiler/

and its preferences file:

/Users/<username>/Library/Preferences/com.c-command.EagleFiler.plist

To access these items, see How can I open the Library folder?.

8.17  What information should I include when I report a problem?

It will be faster and easier to help you if your e-mail includes the following information:

The version of macOS that you are using

Click on the Apple menu and choose About This Mac.

The version of EagleFiler that you are using

Click on the EagleFiler menu and choose About EagleFiler. (Please do not say “the latest version,”
as this is ambiguous.)

Do you have the Mac App Store version?

Click on the EagleFiler menu and choose About EagleFiler. It will say “Mac App Store” at the
bottom of the window.

Specific error information

Please see Sending in an Error Report.

If something isn’t working as you expect

Please describe what you did, what happened, and what you expected to happen instead. If possible,
take a screenshot or two that illustrate the problem (see Sending in Screenshots).

If EagleFiler hangs or freezes

Please see Sending in a “Sample” Report.

155


8.17.1 Sending in an Error Report

If an error window appeared on your screen, please include the exact text of the error message in 
your e-mail.
(It may help to use Copy and Paste.)

Please also send in any errors that were reported in the system log:

1. From EagleFiler’s Help menu, choose Save Diagnostic Report... at the bottom. (If you can’t
launch EagleFiler to access its Help menu, see below.)

2. Choose a location such as your desktop and click Save. Saving the report may take a minute or
so.

3. Create an e-mail to eaglefiler@c-command.com²³¹ and drag the Diagnostic Report.tbz file into
the e-mail message to include it as an attachment/enclosure.

If you can’t launch EagleFiler, you can access the log directly, rather than using the automated 
diagnostic
reporter:

macOS 10.12 and Later

1. Click on Finder in the Dock.

2. From the Go menu, choose Utilities.

3. Double-click the Console application.

4. Click on your Mac under Devices at the left side of the window. (It may be necessary to first
choose Show Sources from the View menu.)

5. From the Action menu, choose All Messages. Make sure that Include Info Messages and
Include Debug Messages are both unchecked. If you are using macOS 11 or later, choose
Start Streaming from the Action menu.

6. If Activities is selected (blue) in the toolbar, click it to turn off activities mode.

7. If the main part of the window shows any recent error messages, select them (or choose Edit ▷

Select All).

8. There are two ways to share the selected part of the log with us:

• Easier: Click the Share button in the toolbar and choose Mail. (If you do not use Apple
Mail as your mail client, you can instead Copy and Paste the log messages into your mail
client.)

• Preferred: Choose Edit ▷ Copy. Open TextEdit and Paste the text into a new plain text
document. Save the TextEdit document to disk and attach it to your e-mail message.

macOS 10.11 and Earlier

1. Click on Finder in the Dock.

²³¹mailto:eaglefiler@c-command.com

156


2. From the Go menu, choose Utilities.

3. Double-click the Console application.

4. Click on All Messages at the left of the window. (It may be necessary to first click the Show
Log List toolbar button if you don’t see All Messages at the left.)

5. If it shows any recent error messages, select them (or choose Edit ▷ Select All).

Note: You may need to click the Earlier button at the bottom of the window to find errors that
did not occur recently.

6. Choose File ▷ Save Selection As... and save the file as My Log.log on your desktop.

7. Drag this file into your e-mail message to include it as an attachment/enclosure.

8.17.2 Sending in Screenshots

To take a screenshot, hold down the Command and Shift keys and press the number 4. Then use the 
mouse
to select the area of the screen that you want to take a picture of. This will create a file called 
Screen
Shot <date> at <time>.png on your desktop. Pressing the keys again will create Screen Shot <date>
at <new time>.png, etc.

You can also take screenshots using the File ▷ Take Screenshot command in the Preview application.

To send in screeenshots, drag the files into your e-mail window to attach them to your message. If 
you’re
using Apple Mail, be sure to set the Image Size pop-up menu at the bottom of the message window to
Actual Size.

8.17.3  Sending in a “Sample” Report

If an app is slow, hangs (e.g. with a spinning beachball), or freezes, a “sample” report can record 
what
your Mac was doing in order to locate the source of the problem. Depending on which app is slow or 
not
responding, you may want to record samples from EagleFiler, Apple Mail, and/or another app.

1. Click on Finder in the Dock.

2. From the Go menu, choose Utilities.

3. Double-click the Activity Monitor program.

4. Select the app in the Activity Monitor window.

5. Do whatever it is in the app that causes the slowness, hang, or freeze. Immediately, click on
Activity Monitor in the Dock and choose Sample Process from the View menu.

6. After Activity Monitor has finished taking the sample, click the Save... button in the “Sample
of <App>” window. Save the file to your desktop and then include it in your e-mail message
to eaglefiler@c-command.com²³² as an attachment. (Please do not copy and paste the text from
the Activity Monitor window.)

²³²mailto:eaglefiler@c-command.com

157


8.17.4 Sending in Crash Log Files

If EagleFiler itself crashes, the EagleFiler Crash Reporter window should automatically come up. 
Make
sure that you enter a valid e-mail address and then click the Send Report button.

If your mail program (or a helper process such as eftexttool) crashes, you’ll need to send in the 
crash log
file manually.

Crash logs are stored in the folder:

/Users/<username>/Library/Logs/DiagnosticReports/

First click on the Finder in the Dock, then click on the Go menu, and hold down the Option key as 
you
choose Library. Open the Logs folder, then DiagnosticReports.

Once you’ve opened the DiagnosticReports folder, find the most recent crash log file for the app 
that
crashed and add it to your e-mail message to eaglefiler@c-command.com²³³ as an attachment.

The crash log file’s name will end with either .crash or .ips. It may be in the DiagnosticReports 
folder
or in the Retired folder inside of DiagnosticReports.

9  Legal Stuff

Copyright and Trademarks

EagleFiler and this manual are copyright  2002–2022 by C-Command Software, LLC²³⁴. All rights 
reserved.

EagleFiler is a trademark of C-Command Software, LLC. Mac is a registered trademark of Apple 
Computer.
All other products mentioned are trademarks of their respective owners.

End User License Agreement

CAREFULLY READ THE FOLLOWING LICENSE AGREEMENT. YOU ACCEPT AND AGREE TO BE
BOUND BY THIS LICENSE AGREEMENT BY DOWNLOADING AND INSTALLING THE PROGRAM.
IF YOU DO NOT AGREE TO THIS LICENSE, THEN DO NOT DOWNLOAD AND INSTALL THE
PROGRAM, AND REMOVE THE SOFTWARE FROM YOUR COMPUTER.

License Grant

“You” means the person or company who is being licensed to use the Software or Documentation. “We,”
“us” and “our” means C-Command Software, LLC.

We hereby grant you a nonexclusive license to use one copy of the Software on any single computer, 
or on
multiple computers only used by a single person. The Software is “in use” on a computer when it is 
loaded
into temporary memory (RAM) or installed into the permanent memory of a computer—for example, a hard
disk or other storage device.

²³³mailto:eaglefiler@c-command.com
²³⁴mailto:mjt@c-command.com

158


Title

We remain the owner of all right, title and interest in the Software and related explanatory 
written materials
(“Documentation”).

Archival or Backup Copies

You may copy the Software for backup and archival purposes, provided that the original and each 
copy is
kept in your possession and that your installation and use of the Software does not exceed that 
allowed in
the “License Grant” section above.

Things You May Not Do

The Software and Documentation are protected by United States copyright laws and international 
treaties.
You must treat the Software and Documentation like any other copyrighted material—for example, a 
book.
You may not:

• copy the Documentation,

• copy the Software except to make archival or backup copies as provided above,

• sublicense, rent, lease or lend any portion of the Software or Documentation.

Transfers

You may transfer all your rights to use the Software and Documentation to another person or legal 
entity
provided you transfer this Agreement, the Software and Documentation, including all copies, updates 
and
prior versions to such person or entity and that you retain no copies, including copies stored on 
computer.

Limited Warranty

The software is provided “as is,” without warranty of any kind, express or implied, including but 
not limited
to the warranties of merchantability, fitness for a particular purpose and noninfringement. In no 
event shall
the authors or copyright holders be liable for any claim, damages or other liability, whether in an 
action
of contract, tort or otherwise, arising from, out of or in connection with the software or the use 
or other
dealings in the software. No employee, agent, dealer or distributor of ours is authorized to modify 
this
limited warranty, nor to make any additional warranties.

Term and Termination

This license agreement takes effect upon your use of the software and remains effective until 
terminated. You
may terminate it at any time by destroying all copies of the Software and Documentation in your 
possession.
It will also automatically terminate if you fail to comply with any term or condition of this 
license agreement.
You agree on termination of this license to destroy all copies of the Software and Documentation in 
your
possession.

General Provisions

1. This written license agreement is the exclusive agreement between you and us concerning the Soft-
ware and Documentation and supersedes any prior purchase order, communication, advertising
or representation concerning the Software.

159


2. This license agreement may be modified only by a writing signed by you and us.

3. This license agreement is governed by the laws of the State of New Hampshire.

4. You agree that the Software will not be shipped, transferred or exported into any country or used
in any manner prohibited by the United States Export Administration Act or any other export
laws, restrictions or regulations.

Components

The following open-source components are used in EagleFiler:

• Regular expression support is provided by the PCRE²³⁵ library package, which is open source 
software,
written by Philip Hazel, and copyright by the University of Cambridge, England.

• Core Foundation²³⁶ is available under the terms of the Apple Public Source License²³⁷.

• CwlDemangle.swift is Copyright  2017 Matt Gallagher and is available under the Apache License
v2.0 with Runtime Library Exception²³⁸.

• easy-ecc (currently here) is Copyright  2013 Kenneth MacKay. All rights reserved.

Redistribution and use in source and binary forms, with or without modification, are permitted pro-
vided that the following conditions are met:

– Redistributions of source code must retain the above copyright notice, this list of conditions and
the following disclaimer.

– Redistributions in binary form must reproduce the above copyright notice, this list of conditions
and the following disclaimer in the documentation and/or other materials provided with the
distribution.

THIS SOFTWARE IS PROVIDED BY THE COPYRIGHT HOLDERS AND CONTRIBUTORS
“AS IS” AND ANY EXPRESS OR IMPLIED WARRANTIES, INCLUDING, BUT NOT LIMITED
TO, THE IMPLIED WARRANTIES OF MERCHANTABILITY AND FITNESS FOR A PARTIC-
ULAR PURPOSE ARE DISCLAIMED. IN NO EVENT SHALL THE COPYRIGHT HOLDER OR
CONTRIBUTORS BE LIABLE FOR ANY DIRECT, INDIRECT, INCIDENTAL, SPECIAL, EX-
EMPLARY, OR CONSEQUENTIAL DAMAGES (INCLUDING, BUT NOT LIMITED TO, PRO-
CUREMENT OF SUBSTITUTE GOODS OR SERVICES; LOSS OF USE, DATA, OR PROFITS;
OR BUSINESS INTERRUPTION) HOWEVER CAUSED AND ON ANY THEORY OF LIABIL-
ITY, WHETHER IN CONTRACT, STRICT LIABILITY, OR TORT (INCLUDING NEGLIGENCE
OR OTHERWISE) ARISING IN ANY WAY OUT OF THE USE OF THIS SOFTWARE, EVEN IF
ADVISED OF THE POSSIBILITY OF SUCH DAMAGE.

• GMEllipticCurveCrypto is Copyright  2014 Richard Moore. All rights reserved.

Redistribution and use in source and binary forms, with or without modification, are permitted pro-
vided that the following conditions are met:

1. Redistributions of source code must retain the above copyright notice, this list of conditions
and the following disclaimer.

²³⁵http://www.pcre.org
²³⁶http://www.opensource.apple.com/source/CF/CF-368.28/
²³⁷http://www.opensource.apple.com/license/apsl/
²³⁸http://swift.org/LICENSE.txt

160


2. Redistributions in binary form must reproduce the above copyright notice, this list of con-
ditions and the following disclaimer in the documentation and/or other materials provided
with the distribution.

THIS SOFTWARE IS PROVIDED BY THE COPYRIGHT HOLDERS AND CONTRIBUTORS
“AS IS” AND ANY EXPRESS OR IMPLIED WARRANTIES, INCLUDING, BUT NOT LIMITED
TO, THE IMPLIED WARRANTIES OF MERCHANTABILITY AND FITNESS FOR A PARTIC-
ULAR PURPOSE ARE DISCLAIMED. IN NO EVENT SHALL THE COPYRIGHT HOLDER OR
CONTRIBUTORS BE LIABLE FOR ANY DIRECT, INDIRECT, INCIDENTAL, SPECIAL, EX-
EMPLARY, OR CONSEQUENTIAL DAMAGES (INCLUDING, BUT NOT LIMITED TO, PRO-
CUREMENT OF SUBSTITUTE GOODS OR SERVICES; LOSS OF USE, DATA, OR PROFITS;
OR BUSINESS INTERRUPTION) HOWEVER CAUSED AND ON ANY THEORY OF LIABIL-
ITY, WHETHER IN CONTRACT, STRICT LIABILITY, OR TORT (INCLUDING NEGLIGENCE
OR OTHERWISE) ARISING IN ANY WAY OUT OF THE USE OF THIS SOFTWARE, EVEN IF
ADVISED OF THE POSSIBILITY OF SUCH DAMAGE.

• Growl²³⁹ is Copyright  The Growl Project, 2004-2007. All rights reserved.

Redistribution and use in source and binary forms, with or without modification, are permitted pro-
vided that the following conditions are met:

1. Redistributions of source code must retain the above copyright notice, this list of conditions
and the following disclaimer.

2. Redistributions in binary form must reproduce the above copyright notice, this list of con-
ditions and the following disclaimer in the documentation and/or other materials provided
with the distribution.

3. Neither the name of Growl nor the names of its contributors may be used to endorse or
promote products derived from this software without specific prior written permission.

THIS SOFTWARE IS PROVIDED BY THE COPYRIGHT HOLDERS AND CONTRIBUTORS
“AS IS” AND ANY EXPRESS OR IMPLIED WARRANTIES, INCLUDING, BUT NOT LIMITED
TO, THE IMPLIED WARRANTIES OF MERCHANTABILITY AND FITNESS FOR A PARTIC-
ULAR PURPOSE ARE DISCLAIMED. IN NO EVENT SHALL THE COPYRIGHT OWNER OR
CONTRIBUTORS BE LIABLE FOR ANY DIRECT, INDIRECT, INCIDENTAL, SPECIAL, EX-
EMPLARY, OR CONSEQUENTIAL DAMAGES (INCLUDING, BUT NOT LIMITED TO, PRO-
CUREMENT OF SUBSTITUTE GOODS OR SERVICES; LOSS OF USE, DATA, OR PROFITS;
OR BUSINESS INTERRUPTION) HOWEVER CAUSED AND ON ANY THEORY OF LIABIL-
ITY, WHETHER IN CONTRACT, STRICT LIABILITY, OR TORT (INCLUDING NEGLIGENCE
OR OTHERWISE) ARISING IN ANY WAY OUT OF THE USE OF THIS SOFTWARE, EVEN IF
ADVISED OF THE POSSIBILITY OF SUCH DAMAGE.

• Thanks to Allan Odgaard for some code snippets that are used in the Software Update installer.

• Canon DOS D30 (no focus).wav: Copyright  2007 FreqMan, used under the terms of the Creative
Commons Attribution License. Modified by Michael Tsai.

• libffi²⁴⁰: Copyright  1996-2003 Red Hat, Inc.

Permission is hereby granted, free of charge, to any person obtaining a copy of this software and
associated documentation files (the “Software”), to deal in the Software without restriction, 
including
without limitation the rights to use, copy, modify, merge, publish, distribute, sublicense, and/or 
sell

²³⁹http://growl.info
²⁴⁰http://sourceware.org/libffi/

161


copies of the Software, and to permit persons to whom the Software is furnished to do so, subject to
the following conditions:

The above copyright notice and this permission notice shall be included in all copies or substantial
portions of the Software.

THE SOFTWARE IS PROVIDED “AS IS”, WITHOUT WARRANTY OF ANY KIND, EXPRESS
OR IMPLIED, INCLUDING BUT NOT LIMITED TO THE WARRANTIES OF MERCHANTABIL-
ITY, FITNESS FOR A PARTICULAR PURPOSE AND NONINFRINGEMENT. IN NO EVENT
SHALL CYGNUS SOLUTIONS BE LIABLE FOR ANY CLAIM, DAMAGES OR OTHER LIABIL-
ITY, WHETHER IN AN ACTION OF CONTRACT, TORT OR OTHERWISE, ARISING FROM,
OUT OF OR IN CONNECTION WITH THE SOFTWARE OR THE USE OR OTHER DEALINGS
IN THE SOFTWARE.

• MailTagsImporter: Copyright  2018 SmallCubed. All rights reserved.

• PyObjC²⁴¹: Copyright 2002, 2003 - Bill Bumgarner, Ronald Oussoren, Steve Majewski, Lele Gaifax,
et.al.

Permission is hereby granted, free of charge, to any person obtaining a copy of this software and
associated documentation files (the “Software”), to deal in the Software without restriction, 
including
without limitation the rights to use, copy, modify, merge, publish, distribute, sublicense, and/or 
sell
copies of the Software, and to permit persons to whom the Software is furnished to do so, subject to
the following conditions:

The above copyright notice and this permission notice shall be included in all copies or substantial
portions of the Software.

THE SOFTWARE IS PROVIDED “AS IS”, WITHOUT WARRANTY OF ANY KIND, EXPRESS OR
IMPLIED, INCLUDING BUT NOT LIMITED TO THE WARRANTIES OF MERCHANTABILITY,
FITNESS FOR A PARTICULAR PURPOSE AND NONINFRINGEMENT. IN NO EVENT SHALL
THE AUTHORS OR COPYRIGHT HOLDERS BE LIABLE FOR ANY CLAIM, DAMAGES OR
OTHER LIABILITY, WHETHER IN AN ACTION OF CONTRACT, TORT OR OTHERWISE,
ARISING FROM, OUT OF OR IN CONNECTION WITH THE SOFTWARE OR THE USE OR
OTHER DEALINGS IN THE SOFTWARE.

• Python²⁴²:

1. This LICENSE AGREEMENT is between the Python Software Foundation (“PSF”), and
the Individual or Organization (“Licensee”) accessing and otherwise using this software
(“Python”) in source or binary form and its associated documentation.

2. Subject to the terms and conditions of this License Agreement, PSF hereby grants Licensee
a nonexclusive, royalty-free, world-wide license to reproduce, analyze, test, perform and/or
display publicly, prepare derivative works, distribute, and otherwise use Python alone or in
any derivative version, provided, however, that PSF’s License Agreement and PSF’s notice of
copyright, i.e., “Copyright  2001, 2002, 2003, 2004, 2005, 2006 Python Software Founda-
tion;  All Rights Reserved” are retained in Python alone or in any derivative version prepared
by Licensee.

3. In the event Licensee prepares a derivative work that is based on or incorporates Python
or any part thereof, and wants to make the derivative work available to others as provided
herein, then Licensee hereby agrees to include in any such work a brief summary of the
changes made to Python.

²⁴¹http://pyobjc.sourceforge.net/
²⁴²http://www.python.org/

162


4. PSF is making Python available to Licensee on an “AS IS” basis. PSF MAKES NO REPRE-
SENTATIONS OR WARRANTIES, EXPRESS OR IMPLIED. BY WAY OF EXAMPLE,
BUT NOT LIMITATION, PSF MAKES NO AND DISCLAIMS ANY REPRESENTATION
OR WARRANTY OF MERCHANTABILITY OR FITNESS FOR ANY PARTICULAR
PURPOSE OR THAT THE USE OF PYTHON WILL NOT INFRINGE ANY THIRD
PARTY RIGHTS.

5. PSF SHALL NOT BE LIABLE TO LICENSEE OR ANY OTHER USERS OF PYTHON
FOR ANY INCIDENTAL, SPECIAL, OR CONSEQUENTIAL DAMAGES OR LOSS AS
A RESULT OF MODIFYING, DISTRIBUTING, OR OTHERWISE USING PYTHON, OR
ANY DERIVATIVE THEREOF, EVEN IF ADVISED OF THE POSSIBILITY THEREOF.

6. This License Agreement will automatically terminate upon a material breach of its terms
and conditions.

7. Nothing in this License Agreement shall be deemed to create any relationship of agency,
partnership, or joint venture between PSF and Licensee. This License Agreement does not
grant permission to use PSF trademarks or trade name in a trademark sense to endorse or
promote products or services of Licensee, or any third party.

8. By copying, installing or otherwise using Python, Licensee agrees to be bound by the terms
and conditions of this License Agreement.

• Shortcut Recorder²⁴³:

Copyright (c) 2006, contributors to ShortcutRecorder. (See the contributors²⁴⁴.)

All rights reserved. Redistribution and use in source and binary forms, with or without 
modification,
are permitted provided that the following conditions are met:

– Redistributions of source code must retain the above copyright notice, this list of conditions and
the following disclaimer.

– Redistributions in binary form must reproduce the above copyright notice, this list of conditions
and the following disclaimer in the documentation and/or other materials provided with the
distribution.

– The name of the contributors may not be used to endorse or promote products derived from this
software without specific prior written permission.

THIS SOFTWARE IS PROVIDED BY THE CONTRIBUTORS “AS IS” AND ANY EXPRESS OR
IMPLIED WARRANTIES, INCLUDING, BUT NOT LIMITED TO, THE IMPLIED WARRANTIES
OF MERCHANTABILITY AND FITNESS FOR A PARTICULAR PURPOSE ARE DISCLAIMED.
IN NO EVENT SHALL THE CONTRIBUTORS BE LIABLE FOR ANY DIRECT, INDIRECT, IN-
CIDENTAL, SPECIAL, EXEMPLARY, OR CONSEQUENTIAL DAMAGES (INCLUDING, BUT
NOT LIMITED TO, PROCUREMENT OF SUBSTITUTE GOODS OR SERVICES; LOSS OF USE,
DATA, OR PROFITS; OR BUSINESS INTERRUPTION) HOWEVER CAUSED AND ON ANY
THEORY OF LIABILITY, WHETHER IN CONTRACT, STRICT LIABILITY, OR TORT (IN-
CLUDING NEGLIGENCE OR OTHERWISE) ARISING IN ANY WAY OUT OF THE USE OF
THIS SOFTWARE, EVEN IF ADVISED OF THE POSSIBILITY OF SUCH DAMAGE.

• SkimNotes²⁴⁵:

Copyright (c) 2008, Christiaan Hofman and contributors
All rights reserved.

²⁴³http://wafflesoftware.net/shortcut/
²⁴⁴http://wafflesoftware.net/shortcut/contributors/
²⁴⁵http://skim-app.sourceforge.net

163


Redistribution and use in source and binary forms, with or without modification, are permitted pro-
vided that the following conditions are met:

Redistributions of source code must retain the above copyright notice, this list of conditions and 
the
following disclaimer.

Redistributions in binary form must reproduce the above copyright notice, this list of conditions 
and
the following disclaimer in the documentation and/or other materials provided with the 
distribution.

Neither the name of Christiaan Hofman nor the names of any other contributors may be used to endorse
or promote products derived from this software without specific prior written permission.

THIS SOFTWARE IS PROVIDED BY THE COPYRIGHT HOLDERS AND CONTRIBUTORS
“AS IS” AND ANY EXPRESS OR IMPLIED WARRANTIES, INCLUDING, BUT NOT LIMITED
TO, THE IMPLIED WARRANTIES OF MERCHANTABILITY AND FITNESS FOR A PARTIC-
ULAR PURPOSE ARE DISCLAIMED. IN NO EVENT SHALL THE COPYRIGHT OWNER OR
CONTRIBUTORS BE LIABLE FOR ANY DIRECT, INDIRECT, INCIDENTAL, SPECIAL, EX-
EMPLARY, OR CONSEQUENTIAL DAMAGES (INCLUDING, BUT NOT LIMITED TO, PRO-
CUREMENT OF SUBSTITUTE GOODS OR SERVICES; LOSS OF USE, DATA, OR PROFITS;
OR BUSINESS INTERRUPTION) HOWEVER CAUSED AND ON ANY THEORY OF LIABIL-
ITY, WHETHER IN CONTRACT, STRICT LIABILITY, OR TORT (INCLUDING NEGLIGENCE
OR OTHERWISE) ARISING IN ANY WAY OUT OF THE USE OF THIS SOFTWARE, EVEN IF
ADVISED OF THE POSSIBILITY OF SUCH DAMAGE.

• vobject²⁴⁶: Copyright (c) 2004-2006 Jeffrey Harris. All rights reserved.

Redistribution and use in source and binary forms, with or without modification, are permitted pro-
vided that the following conditions are met:

1. Redistributions of source code must retain the above copyright notice, this list of conditions
and the following disclaimer.

2. Redistributions in binary form must reproduce the above copyright notice, this list of con-
ditions and the following disclaimer in the documentation and/or other materials provided
with the distribution.

3. The end-user documentation included with the redistribution, if any, must include the fol-
lowing acknowledgment: “This product includes software developed by the Apache Software
Foundation (http://www.apache.org/²⁴⁷).” Alternately, this acknowledgment may appear
in   the software itself, if and wherever such third-party acknowledgments normally appear.

4. The names “Apache” and “Apache Software Foundation” must not be used to endorse or
promote products derived from this software without prior written permission. For written
permission, please contact apache@apache.org²⁴⁸.

5. Products derived from this software may not be called “Apache”, nor may “Apache” appear
in their name, without prior written permission of the Apache Software Foundation.

THIS SOFTWARE IS PROVIDED “AS IS” AND ANY EXPRESSED OR IMPLIED WARRANTIES,
INCLUDING, BUT NOT LIMITED TO, THE IMPLIED WARRANTIES OF MERCHANTABILITY
AND FITNESS FOR A PARTICULAR PURPOSE ARE DISCLAIMED. IN NO EVENT SHALL
THE APACHE SOFTWARE FOUNDATION OR ITS CONTRIBUTORS BE LIABLE FOR ANY
DIRECT, INDIRECT, INCIDENTAL, SPECIAL, EXEMPLARY, OR CONSEQUENTIAL DAM-
AGES (INCLUDING, BUT NOT LIMITED TO, PROCUREMENT OF SUBSTITUTE GOODS OR
SERVICES; LOSS OF USE, DATA, OR PROFITS; OR BUSINESS INTERRUPTION) HOWEVER

²⁴⁶http://vobject.skyhouseconsulting.com/
²⁴⁷http://www.apache.org/
²⁴⁸mailto:apache@apache.org

164


CAUSED AND ON ANY THEORY OF LIABILITY, WHETHER IN CONTRACT, STRICT LI-
ABILITY, OR TORT (INCLUDING NEGLIGENCE OR OTHERWISE) ARISING IN ANY WAY
OUT OF THE USE OF THIS SOFTWARE, EVEN IF ADVISED OF THE POSSIBILITY OF SUCH
DAMAGE.

This software consists of voluntary contributions made by many individuals on behalf of the Apache

Software Foundation. For more information on the Apache Software Foundation, please see 
http://www.apache.org/²⁴⁹.
Portions of this software are based upon public domain software originally written at the National

Center for Supercomputing Applications, University of Illinois, Urbana-Champaign.

10  Version History

1.9.9—October 17, 2022

• Made various code modernizations.

• Worked around a change in Apple News that prevented EagleFiler from showing up in the Share
menu.

• The RTF viewer now supports clickable file links created by Nisus Writer Pro.

• Renamed Preferences to Settings for macOS 13.

• EagleFiler is better at detecting which part of a filename to select when renaming in the records
list.

• Indexing e-mail attachments is faster.

• When an error occurs, EagleFiler no longer brings the Errors window to the front if it’s already
visible.

• The Importing Mail From Airmail section of the manual now explains how to import multiple
messages at once.

• Updated the How do Finder tags work with EagleFiler? section of the manual.

• Updated the Rename for Dropbox Windows script.

• EagleFiler now requires macOS 10.13 or later.

• Fixed a bug where an e-mail message could accumulate an extra newline when round-tripping
through merging to a mailbox and then extracting to individual files.

• Fixed a bug where the Import From Apple Mail script could fail with certain message encodings.

• Fixed a bug where extracting an e-mail message could fail if the subject contained an emoji that
was too new for the file system.

• Fixed a bug where the Remove Duplicate Messages script would sometimes report spurious errors
if the Message-ID header was long.

1.9.8—June 22, 2022

• Added preliminary support for the forthcoming macOS 13 Ventura.

• Added support for displaying files from the Bike outliner.

• You can now drag and drop attached files from a record’s note or from an RTFD record to other
apps, e.g. to Finder to extract them or to Mail to attach them to a new e-mail message.

• When a file is attached to a record (i.e. included in its note), you can now hover the cursor over
the attachment’s icon to see a tooltip showing its filename.

²⁴⁹http://www.apache.org/

165


• When you import messages exported from Gmail via Google Takeout, the labels are now searchable
in EagleFiler.

• Improved EagleFiler’s search indexing, so that you can now find links in Web archives, find e-mail
messages by Message-ID or Reply-To, and find records by their EagleFiler GUID.

• If a note is missing, when EagleFiler reports this in the Errors window, you can now use the
Trash or Update Checksum button to suppress further error reports if you can’t or don’t want
to restore the note file from backup.

• The format for metadata backups has been revised so that it is faster and more efficient in memory
and on disk, particularly when there are many records in the same folder or there are notes with
large attached files. The XML files are no longer updated with spurious changes, which is more
friendly for libraries that are backed up, synced, or under version control. The new format also
works around a macOS limitation where very large notes could not be backed up. EagleFiler will
still read backups in the old format when importing or rebuilding, and you can click here²⁵⁰ to
enable an esoteric preference if you want it to still write the old format for interoperability with
previous versions of EagleFiler.

• A record’s title and its filename are no longer automatically linked when you set them to the same
value, only when you set the title to be blank. This allows EagleFiler to better preserve your
intent, i.e. that the title should stay at the current value even if the filename changes.

• The filename counter is now preserved when rebuilding a library. This means that markers like

-1 and -2 will no longer double up (-1-2) if there are further filename conflicts, and they’ll go
away entirely if the record is moved to a location where there is no filename conflict.

• The insertion point in the record viewer is easier to see in Dark Mode.

• Improved the display of certain Web archive files.

• Improved the speed of indexing e-mails with certain attachment types.

• Updated the Import From Instapaper via NetNewsWire script to accommodate a change in Net-
NewsWire.

• Updated the following sections of the manual:

– Merge Mailboxes/Message Files

– Records List

– How can I put my library on my iPhone?

– Ways to Import

• Updated the Read Me.

• You can now omit the library parameter in an x-eaglefiler link, which means that EagleFiler
will look for the record in the current library.

• Record GUIDs in x-eaglefiler links are now purely alphanumeric for easier searching and
double-clicking to select.

• Adjusted the toolbar layout of the Errors window to make it clearer what options are available
for each error.

• Improved the error reporting when a record can’t be moved.

• Updated to version 1.5.3 of the SkimNotes framework.

• EagleFiler is better at handling and working around file system errors when creating a smart
folder or editing a file.

• Worked around a macOS bug that could cause a crash when importing multiple Evernote files at
once.

²⁵⁰x-eaglefiler://default?k=RecordWriteVersion3Metadata&v=YES

166


• Fixed a bug where a record’s preference for linking its title and filename was sometimes not
preserved when rebuilding the library.

• Fixed a bug where the record viewer might not update its display when changing to a new record
if you had just renamed the previous one.

• Fixed a bug that could cause an error backing up the metadata shortly after editing a record.

• Fixed a bug where the source list’s colored circle label indicator wasn’t positioned correctly 
when
using the small sidebar icon size on macOS 12.3.1.

• Fixed a bug where a smart folder could get messed up if you tried to rename it to the empty
string.

• Fixed a bug where EagleFiler showed the copy cursor when moving a tag to a different parent.

• Fixed a bug where phrase searches containing a colon might not find anything.

• Fixed a bug where accessing a record’s guid via AppleScript failed if one had not been previously
assigned.

• Fixed a bug where some background operations could report an internal error after a record was
deleted.

1.9.7—March 4, 2022

• EagleFiler now uses adaptive color mapping for rich text records and notes (in addition to plain
text records and e-mails, as in previous versions) so that you automatically see light text on a
dark background when your Mac is running in Dark Mode. This can be controlled using the
DarkTextBackgroundInDarkMode setting in the esoteric preferences. The standard Light Mode
colors are written to disk so that the files still display properly on other Macs and platforms.

• You can now use the Add Sketch. . . command to draw on your iPhone or iPad’s screen and import
the image directly into EagleFiler without having to transfer a file.

• The forthcoming macOS 12.3 no longer includes the Python scripting language, so the sample
AppleScripts that used Python have been updated to remove that dependency.

• Customers migrating from Gmail, e.g. after the announcement that free G Suite plans would be
discontinued, can move their e-mail archive to EagleFiler as described in the Importing Mail From
Webmail/Gmail section of the manual.

• The “new look” version of Outlook doesn’t yet support AppleScript. Thus, if you press the
capture key, Outlook will incorrectly report to EagleFiler that no messages were selected. In such
situations, EagleFiler will now offer to turn off “New Outlook” for you. You can then restart
Outlook and proceed with the capture.

• When capturing from old versions of DEVONthink, EagleFiler can now preserve the URL, label,
and tags. (This was already supported for newer versions.)

• You can now press the Delete key when Trash is selected in the source list as a shortcut for
Empty Trash. . ..

• If you delete the last folder or mailbox in the source list, EagleFiler now selects the previous
source instead of selecting Trash.

• Improved the performance of the source list when using the RecordsListLabelUnderlineStyle

setting in the esoteric preferences.

• The How can I access my library from multiple Macs? section of the manual now links to the
scripts that help you rename files in accordance with Microsoft OneDrive’s restrictions.

• Updated the Importing Mail From Outlook section of the manual to work around an Outlook bug
using saved smart folders.

167


• Updated the Applications That Support Capture section of the manual.

• Worked around a bug where WebKit could hang when cleaning up its preferences.

• Worked around a bug in Apple Mail that could prevent it from being able to import a message
with an empty body. EagleFiler will now “fix” such messages when importing them, so that Mail
will be able to import EagleFiler’s native mailbox file storage. If you already have such messages
in EagleFiler, exporting the selected messages will create a new mailbox file that Mail can read.

• Worked around a WebKit bug that could cause importing certain sites to never complete.

• Fixed a problem where an AppleScript timeout could make importing messages with MailTags
very slow.

• Fixed a regression (due to a macOS change) where opening a library from within the import
options dialog didn’t work because the open panel would be behind the options dialog.

• Updated to version 1.5.2 of the SkimNotes framework.

1.9.6—November 10, 2021

• Worked around a problem where an Apple Mail error on macOS 12 could prevent the capture key
from working.

• The EagleFiler ▷ Add command in MailMate now preserves the IMAP keywords of the selected
messages as tags in EagleFiler.

• Improved the display of e-mail messages that have no plain text part.

• Worked around a macOS bug that caused the Set Filename/Title/etc. contextual menu com-
mands from working with the selected text in a Web archive.

• The bookmarklets instructions now explain how to disable repeated permissions prompts in Fire-
fox.

• EagleFiler now reports a better error when a message in Gmail’s All Mail mailbox can’t be
imported due to Apple Mail’s optimized storage.

• The Open in Browser button in the Errors window can now work on multiple selected errors
at a time.

• Worked around a problem where minor damage to EagleFiler’s database could prevent searches
within a tag from working.

• Updated the crash reporter for macOS 12 Monterey.

• EagleFiler now declares notch compatibility for the new MacBook Pros.

• Fixed a bug that could cause a crash when dragging and dropping to the records list.

• Fixed a bug where EagleFiler would report an error when using a custom text highlight color.

1.9.5—July 13, 2021

• Worked around a change in the macOS 12 Beta that caused EagleFiler to crash at launch.

• The capture key now works with the Iron and Orion Web browsers and with beta and developer
versions of Microsoft Edge.

• Improved the speed of the records list on macOS 11 when lots of e-mail messages are selected.

• The Copy Source URL command now puts the record title on the pasteboard, in addition to the
URL, e.g. so that the title is preserved if you paste into Safari’s Bookmarks window.

• The Evernote importer is better at recognizing files that should be extracted as separate files
rather than imported as text attachments.

• Improved the speed of extracting message files from mailboxes by reducing Spotlight overhead.

168


• The Copy command is much faster when lots of e-mail messages are selected.

• Worked around a macOS 11 issue where sometimes a custom folder icon or emoji tag abbreviation
in the source list would be drawn as if the window were in the background, when it wasn’t. Also,
they no longer dim when the window is only behind an inspector or another application’s floating
window, such as OmniFocus’s Quick Entry.

• Made a change to prevent macOS from allowing the volume containing an open library to be
ejected.

• Fixed a regression where built-in items in the source list could be incorrectly shown as 
editable.

• Fixed some regressions when renaming in the source list. Pressing Esc now discards the edit in
progress. Changes are saved when you click away or close the window, not just when you press
Return or Tab. In-progress changes are no longer lost when a background change occurs.

• Fixed a bug where PDF attachments in RTFD files could become invisible when using the

RespectImageDPI esoteric preference.

• Fixed a bug where an internal error could occur when resizing images in an RTFD file for display.

• Fixed a bug where merging mailboxes or message files could import the new mailbox as the wrong
type of file if one of the source files had an extension in its filename.

• Fixed an internal error validating the records list for deletion.

1.9.4—April 29, 2021

• Improved the Import ENEX File. . . command, particularly to handle invalid XML generated by
Evernote 10:

– If the ENEX file is invalid XML, instead of failing with an error, EagleFiler now tries to skip
over the bad parts of the file to import as many notes as it can.

– The invalid sections of the file are saved as individual .enex files and imported into the
Invalid Evernote Notes folder. EagleFiler also recovers what it can from each one and
imports it as an RTF file.

– If the ENEX file is valid but the ENML for a particular note is invalid, instead of failing with
an error, EagleFiler now tries to repair the XML. It saves the original XML in the Invalid
Evernote Content folder, converts the ENML to RTF as best it can, and tags the RTF
record with invalid evernote xml.

– If a note has an attachment with no file extension, EagleFiler now tries to infer one based on
the file’s contents.

– Improved handling of images that cannot be resized.

– Fixed a bug where importing multiple notes having lone resources with the same name would
only import one of them.

• Improved handling of libraries stored in iCloud Drive. We still recommend turning off Optimize
Mac Storage in System Preferences ▷ Apple ID ▷ iCloud, as EagleFiler works best when
the files in your library are fully downloaded to your Mac. However, it is now much better at
handling files that have been evicted to save space:

– EagleFiler automatically downloads evicted files and notes when you view them or try to
move or rename them. Mailbox files are downloaded if needed to rebuild the list of messages
they contain.

– It does not download files in order to index them. This allows you to search files that had
previously been indexed without downloading everything just to make sure the index is up-
to-date.

169


– When you open a library and EagleFiler checks to make sure there are no missing files, it
no longer reports evicted files as missing. However, if you do a manual Verify it will report
errors for any files that are not fully stored on your Mac, as their content cannot be checked
for damage.

– When opening a library, EagleFiler fully downloads essential files like smart folders and meta-
data backups, so that they are available to you and to prevent the creation of duplicates due
to conflicts.

– EagleFiler no longer reports an error when tagging an evicted file. Instead, it stores the tag
locally in its database and applies it to the file the next time it’s downloaded.

• Improved importing of files stored in iCloud that were evicted from the Mac.

• Improved the Import Bookmarks... section of the manual.

• The source list can now display custom folder icons when running on macOS 11.

• The source list contextual menu now lets you paste custom icons onto smart folders, not just
regular folders.

• EagleFiler can now import a .eml file with an empty name, as FastMail sometimes exports.

• Added MJTWindowToolbarStyleUnified to the esoteric preferences. This lets you return to the
pre–macOS 11 window style where the title is above the toolbar, leaving room for more toolbar
items.

• If you try to move or rename a record whose file is missing, EagleFiler now warns you and aborts
the operation to preserve the library’s integrity. (You can still move missing files to the trash to
get rid of them.)

• If there’s an error moving a record, EagleFiler now reverts the change to prevent the database
from getting out of sync.

• If WebKit crashes while downloading a Web page, EagleFiler now applies a workaround and
retries.

• Fixed a bug where records that were in the process of being imported could displayed in the
records list before the import was complete, thus temporarily showing the wrong file size or date.

• Fixed a bug indexing an RTFD file containing a PDF file with incomplete metadata.

• Fixed a bug where importing a file with a label could cause the label to turn into a color-named
tag in EagleFiler or Finder could show an extra color-named tag.

• Fixed a bug where some toolbar buttons could have their borders clipped when running on macOS
11 with Increase contrast enabled.

• Fixed a bug where, on macOS 11, sometimes the source list text and icon would be drawn as if
the window were in the background, when it wasn’t.

• Fixed a bug where an Anywhere search containing a lone - would never find any matches if

Match Partial Words was checked.

• Fixed a bug where invalid split view state could cause a window to open with a collapsed records
list, which would confuse people because it would look like all the files were gone. (In fact, you
could drag down the divider to show the records list.)

• Fixed a bug where a file that was in the process of being imported could be reported as missing
if the library was being verified at the same time.

• Fixed a regression in EagleFiler 1.9.3 that could cause an error to be logged when emptying the
trash if a record had a note, and could potentially leave forgotten records in the trash.

1.9.3—February 17, 2021

170


• The Merge Mailboxes/Message Files command now works on heterogeneous selections, e.g. so
that you can add a lone .eml file to an existing mailbox. This will preserve any tags or notes that
you’ve added.

• Improved importing of Web pages from various publications.

• When importing from Evernote, if you’ve added a title to a note that contains a single attached
file, EagleFiler now preserves that title when unpacking the attachment.

• Made some optimizations to improve the performance of importing large numbers of small files
at once.

• The capture key now works in Reeder 5.

• When capturing from Outlook, EagleFiler now helps you to download messages that were only
partially downloaded from the server so that they can be fully imported into EagleFiler.

• If there’s an error capturing from Outlook, EagleFiler now reports which message was the source
of the error.

• When capturing e-mail messages, EagleFiler now hides the progress window immediately when
the capture is done.

• EagleFiler now maintains its own error log file, so you can still access information for 
troubleshoot-
ing when the macOS system log isn’t working properly.

• Added the Import From Apple Mail (Plain Text) script.

• The software updater reports a more useful error message if you try to update EagleFiler while
running it from the disk image. This should prevent confusion where you continue running an old
version despite telling it to update.

• Worked around an encoding bug in Apple Mail that could cause message data to be altered when
using the Import From Apple Mail script.

• Fixed a bug where importing a folder would sometimes add tags from OpenMeta to the wrong
files.

• Fixed a bug where tag syncing during an import could cause a hang.

• Fixed a bug that could cause metadata loss if you moved a record’s container while it was being
imported.

• Fixed a bug where the record viewer could have the wrong width when opening the window at a
small size.

• Fixed a bug where the source list outline view might be too narrow when re-opening a library.

• Fixed a bug where the source list width wasn’t always properly saved, which could mess up hiding
and showing that pane.

• Fixed a bug where undoing extracting a message from a mailbox required two undos instead of
one.

• Fixed an internal error when viewing a message in a mailbox whose file was missing.

• Fixed a bug where a damaged Microsoft Word file could cause EagleFiler to import some bad
metadata that would prevent it from being able to save its database.

• Fixed a bug where EagleFiler would crash when trying to share a message from a missing mailbox
file on macOS 11.

1.9.2—December 21, 2020

• Searches of RTFD files can now find links, embedded filenames, and the contents of embedded
PDF files. This takes effect for newly imported files or if you rebuild your library’s index.

171


• The built-in tags now use standard system colors, which update based on whether your Mac is in
Dark Mode or Light Mode or has increased contrast enabled.

• On macOS 11, tag names and abbreviation symbols in the source list now “fade out” in background
windows to match the rest of the icons and text.

• On macOS 10.12 and later, EagleFiler will automatically update the unread, flagged, and note

tags to use the latest abbreviation symbols so that your old libraries are consistent with new 
ones.

• Various additional Unicode symbols can now be used in tag names.

• EagleFiler now uses Nitter to import tweets due to Twitter shutting down an endpoint.

• Updated the toolbar icons for increasing and decreasing the font size.

• Improved indexing when EagleFiler can’t find or load the relevant Spotlight plug-in.

• It is now possible to exclude certain images from processing when importing from Evernote in
order to work around a macOS crashing bug.

• Add the Evernote Bulk Export script.

• The Import Examples script now shows how to look up existing records by path.

• Added the Remove Quarantine script.

• Added RecordsListLabelPreferTitle to the esoteric preferences, which lets you show the col-
ored label indicator in the Title column instead of in the File column.

• The indexer now runs natively on Apple Silicon Macs.

• Increased the maximum width of the source list.

• Worked around a macOS bug that could cause slowness or a crash when drawing the source list.

• Worked around a macOS bug that prevented the diagnostic report from working properly on
Apple Silicon Macs.

• Fixed a bug where the source list didn’t update after renaming a tag to an invalid name.

• Fixed a regression with the window title when nothing was selected.

• Updated the Korean localization.

1.9.1—November 4, 2020

• If a record has a label, but the File column is hidden, EagleFiler now shows the label’s circular
indicator in the Title column instead, so that you can still see that it’s labelled.

• EagleFiler’s viewer is now able to display the content of records that are alias files.

• When capturing from Evernote, if the selected notes came from more than one notebook, Eagle-
Filer now puts them in folders named after their notebook. This makes it possible to Select All
under All Notes and press the capture key to import everything from Evernote while preserving
the folder structure.

• Evernote 10 no longer supports AppleScript, so if you press the capture key from it, EagleFiler
will now show an error message that recommends a different way of importing.

• Showing an inspector window will now move it to the current space if it was already visible but
on another space.

• Normally, EagleFiler indicates a record’s label by showing a colored circle in the File or Title
column (like Finder does). You can now use RecordsListLabelUnderlineStyle in the esoteric
preferences to make it additionally underline the filename and title, to make the color stand out
more.

• Added the Download Apple Mail Messages script, which can help fully download messages so that
they can be imported successfully.

172


• Added the Batch Set Creation Date script.

• Improved the error messages and Importing Mail From Apple Mail section of the manual to better
handle messages that are only partially downloaded.

• The Importing Mail From Apple Mail section of the manual now includes a section on “Gmail
and ‘All Mail’ ”.

• Worked around a sandbox bug in macOS 10.15.7 and 11.0 that prevented the Import Bookmarks...
and Import ENEX File. . . commands from working.

• Worked around a bug in macOS 11 that could cause a crash when importing from an ENEX file
containing a certain kind of image.

• Worked around a macOS bug where sometimes a newly imported folder would not show up in
the source list (even though the disclosure triangle was updated).

• Added OldApplicationIcon1.5 to the esoteric preferences, for customers who prefer the previous
EagleFiler application icon.

• Made several workarounds for a macOS bug that could cause a crash when drawing the source
list.

• Fixed a bug where EagleFiler could incorrectly warn about opening a large number of selected
records when the Share button was visible on macOS 11.

• Fixed an internal error that could be reported when dragging and dropping onto the records list.

• Fixed a bug where the insertion point could end up in the wrong place if you were typing quickly
in a text or RTF file at the same time EagleFiler happened to auto-save it.

• Fixed a bug where capturing a large number of messages from Apple Mail could time out.

1.9—October 21, 2020

• Updated the user interface for macOS 11 Big Sur:

– Redesigned the application, document, and mailbox icons.

– EagleFiler uses the new inline title bar style on macOS 11, and information about the current
source and search results is now shown in the subtitle.

– The toolbar defaults to icon-only mode and supports the new large icon style. The toolbar
icons have been updated. EagleFiler uses the new system share button and the new search
field, which automatically expands and collapses.

– The Info, Tags, and Tag Cloud toolbar icons now highlight when that inspector window is
open.

– The source list icons have been updated.

– EagleFiler now colors the source list icon of a folder or mailbox to indicate its label.

– Improved the appearance of the records list columns menu.

• The source list now uses the system text and icon sizing, which can be configured in the General
pane of System Preferences and overridden using SourcesRowSizeStyle in the esoteric prefer-
ences. The EagleFiler-specific font and icon preferences for the source list have been retired.

• The source list now indicates folder and mailbox labels with a colored circle. The toolbar and
menus now show labels with circles instead of round rectangles, to match.

• The records list now shows labels using colored circles in File column instead of coloring the
background of the whole row. This is consistent with Finder and works better on macOS 11 Big
Sur.

• The capture key now works with Apple Mail on macOS 11.

• The capture key now works with the Microsoft Edge browser.

173


• If you use the Batch Change... command with only one record selected, EagleFiler now pre-fills
all the fields based on that record. This makes it possible to use Batch Change as a modal
editor for the record’s properties, tabbing from one field to the next.

• The To column now shows all the recipients of message, not just the first.

• You can now search by Any Address, e.g. to find messages sent to or from a particular address.

• You can now open the original copy of an e-mail in Apple Mail by using the Open Source URL
command. (If the original e-mail has been deleted, you can still double-click to open EagleFiler’s
copy of the message in Apple Mail.)

• You can hold down the Command key when dragging a record onto a tag in the source list to
“move” instead of “copy” to that tag, i.e. assign that tag and unassign all others (inspired by
OmniFocus).

• From the Info window, you can now use the Command-Shift-T keyboard shortcut to jump the

Tags field.

• Arrow-keying through the records list is faster.

• A folder of smart folders now shows the merged contents of all the smart folders it contains.

• Improved importing of Web pages from Discourse forums, Stack Overflow, Twitter, and various
Web sites that have pop-ups.

• When you import a duplicate file, the Reveal in Library button now shows the pre-existing file
in its containing folder rather than mixed in with everything else under Records.

• When importing a message from Apple Mail that has a missing attachment, EagleFiler now adds
the missing attachments tag to the mailbox and mentions the missing file in the mailbox’s
note, so that you can still find this information after closing the Errors window.

• Improved the following sections of the manual:

– Applications That Support Capture

– Export...

– How can I encrypt my files?

– How does indexing in EagleFiler work?

– Importing From a Scanner

– Importing From iOS

– Importing Mail From Outlook

– Scan for New Files

• EagleFiler now requires macOS 10.12 or later.

• Improved the Apple Help navigation bar coloring and layout.

• Records now have an is folder AppleScript property. This is faster and more concise than
comparing the record’s universal type identifier property with public.folder.

• Added the Import From Specified Folders script.

• The Copy Notes to Spotlight Comments script now works with folder records that have notes.

• EagleFiler is better able to display and merge malformed .eml files.

• Worked around a bug in Safari 14 that prevents apps from receiving Web archive text or rich text
when using the system service. EagleFiler will instead import the selected text as plain text.

• Worked around a problem where iCloud Drive would rename files out from under EagleFiler,
causing it to lose track of them. This particularly happened with long filenames containing lots
of Asian characters or emoji.

174


• When importing a file, EagleFiler will remove any stray quarantine information that would prevent
macOS from opening it when double-clicked. For example, this can help when importing files that
were saved to iCloud Drive from an iPhone.

• Worked around a change in Airmail that prevented importing messages via drag and drop. This
once again works for single messages. Multi-message drags fail due to a macOS issue. On macOS
10.14, drag and drop from Airmail doesn’t seem to work at all (even to Finder) so EagleFiler
shows an error that recommends you use the File ▷ Save command instead.

• Worked around a bug in Apple Mail that could cause a dragged-and-dropped message to import
within a numbered folder.

• When initiating a search of a specific library via URL, e.g. from Alfred or LaunchBar (see the
Searching From Other Applications section of the manual), EagleFiler now brings that library’s
window to the front.

• Worked around a macOS bug where source list text was hard to read when esoteric font smoothing
preferences are set.

• Worked around a bug in macOS 11 that prevented progress bars from being drawn.

• Updated to version 1.4.4 of the SkimNotes framework.

• Fixed a bug where, on macOS 11, sometimes a new plain text file wouldn’t be selected in the
records list when created from the toolbar.

• Fixed a bug where exact searches and search match highlighting weren’t case-insensitive for 
certain
non-ASCII characters.

• Fixed a bug that could cause a crash when opening the Quick Look window.

• Fixed a bug where file names and extensions excluded from Scan for New Files were only excluded
when scanning the top-level folder.

• Fixed a bug where in rare cases a mailbox or subfolder could be added to a folder without this
being reflected in the source list.

• Fixed a bug where a movie’s audio would keep playing if you switched to viewing another record
without pausing it.

• Fixed a regression where negative search terms like -foo didn’t work (but !foo did).

1.8.14—June 10, 2020

• EagleFiler now shows a more detailed Kind for text files, e.g. Markdown document or Ruby
Source instead of Text File.

• Improved importing from various Web sites, including the New York Times and Discourse forums,
where sometimes the content would be truncated or overlaid.

• Worked around file errors caused by APFS’s strict handling of Unicode characters, e.g. not
allowing emoji that were added in later versions of macOS. This could cause an import to fail
when creating a new file based on a Web page or other user-generated content or when importing
a file that had been saved on HFS+ or a newer version of APFS. EagleFiler will now escape any
unsuitable characters so that the import can proceed without error.

• When importing from a Web view as plain text via drag and drop or the system service, EagleFiler
will now save the source URL.

• When capturing from Apple Mail, the error messages about special mailboxes and IMAP path
prefixes are more helpful.

• Added accessibility labels for the New Record toolbar buttons so that they work better with
VoiceOver.

175


• EagleFiler is now localized in Russian.

• The To Import folder can now be replaced by an alias if you want to relocate it to another 
location
(e.g. to work around a ScanSnap path length limitation).

• Improved recognition of bookmark files that are missing their filename extension.

• The Apple Mail importer is better able to reassemble messages in cases where Mail has saved
duplicate copies of an attachment file in the same folder.

• The OCR With PDFpen script now removes the “NeedsOCR” tag after applying OCR.

• Improved the following sections of the manual:

– Export...

– Importing iMessages

– Importing Mail From Apple Mail

– Source List

• Worked around an issue that could cause RStudio files to have generic icons.

• Worked around a problem where EagleFiler would try to open a database file before it had been
fully downloaded from iCloud Drive.

• Update to version 1.4.3 of the SkimNotes framework.

• Fixed a bug importing Apple Mail attachments where the attachment name in the message and
the file on disk had different Unicode normalizations.

• Fixed a bug where capturing from Safari failed if JavaScript was disabled.

• Fixed a bug where the Trash button in the Errors window could be enabled when no errors were
selected.

• Fixed a bug where entering invalid Unicode could lead to database errors.

• Fixed a bug where adding a lone - to an indexed search query could prevent it from finding any
matches.

1.8.13—April 15, 2020

• When importing from Apple Mail, EagleFiler now sets the abbreviation symbols and colors for
any colored flag tags.

• The capture key now works with DEVONthink 3 and preserves more metadata when importing.

• If you press the capture key in Leaf or News Explorer, EagleFiler now shows instructions for how
to import instead of reporting an error.

• Updated the Import From Instapaper via NetNewsWire script for NetNewsWire 5. This script
can also be used to import the unread articles from non-Instapaper RSS feeds.

• EagleFiler is better at importing the full content of Reddit Web pages that ask you to click a
button to show more comments.

• Numeric sorting in the records list now works with numbers larger than 5 digits.

• Improved the speed of the records list when there are highlighted search terms.

• The text size in the Tag Cloud window now updates as you resize the window.

• Improved the following sections of the manual:

– Export...

– How can I access my library from multiple Macs?

– Importing From a Scanner

• Improved the handling of errors when creating a new library.

176


• Fixed a bug where EagleFiler could report an error when capturing a message from Apple Mail
that had an attached file whose name was encoded in a particular way.

• Updated to version 1.4.1 of the SkimNotes framework.

1.8.12—February 4, 2020

• Improved capturing from MarsEdit. Posts are now imported as HTML instead of plain text, so

they preview properly in EagleFiler’s viewer. (This can be overridden by changing the 
MarsEditCaptureFormat

esoteric preference from html to txt.) You can now capture multiple selected posts at once. The
filename is now based on the slug, if available, instead of the title. Tags are now preserved. HTML
entities in the title, category, or tags are now decoded.

• Worked around a MailTags bug where tags might not be imported from Apple Mail when using
a newer version of MailTags, capturing multiple messages at once, and the messages were stored
locally.

• The new version of the Hook app has improved support for linking files with EagleFiler. EagleFiler
customers can get a 20% discount on Hook with coupon code G11X8-G665N-EFR (good through
2020-02-15).

• Added the note RTF and note HTML scripting properties, which let you get and set the rich text
contents of a record’s note.

• Added the Merge Records script, which lets you combine the text of multiple selected records into
one.

• Improved the reliability of the MailTags importer.

• Improved the .emlx importer.

• Improved the display of e-mail messages that specify an incorrect text encoding for an HTML
part, such as those generated by MailRaider.

• EagleFiler knows about more message attachment file types.

• EagleFiler will now skip importing files that look like Dropbox conflicts of its metadata files.

• Fixed a bug where importing a file whose name begins with a period might not treat it as the
proper file type.

• Fixed a bug where contextual menu items would not be properly validated when Control-clicking
on selected text in an HTML file or Web archive.

• Fixed a bug where an error loading a .eml file (e.g. because the file is missing) would cause the
previously displayed message to be shown rather than an error.

• Fixed a bug where importing a folder when a folder already existed with the same name but
different case would cause the newly uniqued folder name to have the wrong case.

• Fixed a bug where a narrow date column could display as empty instead of showing truncated
values.

• Fixed a bug where saving a message as a .eml file would fail if the message’s subject contained a

NUL character.

1.8.11—December 30, 2019

• The capture key now works in Brave Browser.

• There’s now an official PopClip extension for EagleFiler, which avoids the warning about the
extension being unsigned.

• Scripts of the form get first library record where its file is file are now optimized
to quickly look up the record without having to check every record in the library. This can be
useful if you have a Hazel script that receives a file and you want to do something with the
corresponding record in EagleFiler.

177


• Records now have a last used date AppleScript property, corresponding to the last time the
file was opened in an app.

• Records now have a missing AppleScript property to detect whether the file has been moved or
deleted.

• Worked around a series of bugs in macOS 10.15 that could prevent images imported from Evernote
from being sized properly.

• Worked around a change in macOS 10.15 that prevented certain OmniGraffle files from being
displayed in the viewer.

• Improve importing of AudioNote files when AudioNote is not installed.

• Fixed a bug where importing an attached file from Evernote might not preserve its filename.

• Fixed a bug importing an Apple Mail mailbox that contained another mailbox with the same
name.

• Worked around a macOS bug that could prevent launching EagleFiler after using AirPlay.

• Fixed a bug where e-mails containing HTML tags that were encoded with UTF-7 would not
display properly.

• Fixed bug the viewer’s auto-save could cause pending tag changes to be saved prematurely, while
the field was still in edit mode.

• Improved the following sections of the manual:

– Capture key

– How can I put my library on my iPhone?

– How can I run optical character recognition (OCR) on my PDFs?

• The Activity window now uses the monospaced digits font to avoid jitter when indexing.

• The Slideshow button no longer causes an error to be logged.

• Modernized the localizations.

1.8.10—September 26, 2019

• When converting from Evernote to rich text (RTFD), EagleFiler makes images display at their
intended sizes. (Previously, EagleFiler used the actual sizes of the image files it was given.) Very
large images are scaled down to fit a reasonable page width. No image data is lost, as EagleFiler
changes the logical image resolution rather than resampling the image.

• Searching using Match Partial Words now works better with queries containing the / character.

• When multiple records are selected in the viewer, EagleFiler now shows the overall count in
addition to the breakdown by file type.

• Temporary files are now excluded from iCloud Drive syncing.

• Worked around a Spotlight bug in macOS 10.14 that could prevent indexing from making progress.

• Fixed various bugs in the Evernote-to-RTF converter: lines that would run together into one,
extra line breaks and spaces, and text content that was missing or incorrectly formatted due to a
macOS bug.

• Fixed a bug where EagleFiler would let you import a new file using the same name as an existing
record whose file was missing. This could lead to the old record becoming linked to the new file.

• Fixed a bug that could cause a crash when a Software Update error occurred.

• Fixed a bug with the crash reporter window and Dark Mode.

• Fixed a bug where importing a Web page whose title was “.” could cause an error.

178


• Updated to Xcode 11.

1.8.9—August 20, 2019

• EagleFiler can now display multi-page Adobe Illustrator documents, and the text is selectable
and searchable.

• Updated the Importing From a Scanner section of the manual.

• You can now rename a record and change its extension if the new extension is equivalent. For
example, if you import a file as .jpeg you can now rename it to .jpg, but EagleFiler will still
protect you from renaming it to something completely different that would prevent the file from
opening.

• Optimized the toolbar to improve responsiveness.

• Fixed a bug where accented characters an ENEX file could be lost during import.

• Fixed a bug where importing an ENEX file could add an extra character after a link.

• Fixed a bug where a .eml file might not display properly after renaming it.

• Fixed a regression where some .eml files did not display the sender.

• Fixed a bug where sometimes EagleFiler would neither quit nor report an error if you tried to
quit while an operation was in progress.

• Fixed a regression (due to no longer using QuickTime) where animated GIFs were not playable.

• Fixed a bug with the Replace in Filenames (Regex) script and some special characters.

• Fixed a regression where the Tag Cloud toolbar button was disabled when it shouldn’t have
been.

1.8.8—June 26, 2019

• EagleFiler now requires macOS 10.9 or later.

• When dragging in an attached file from a rich text view (e.g. OmniFocus or TextEdit), EagleFiler
now imports the file itself rather than creating an RTFD file with the attached file inside.

• The Batch Change... window remembers whether you had selected Append or Replace.

• Added support for indexing more types of files attached to e-mail messages.

• The keyboard shortcut for the EagleFiler: Import With Options service is now localized for
German, so that the Command-Shift-Option-1 combination still works with the different keyboard
layout.

• Pressing the capture key while in Reeder 4 now shows instructions for importing from Reeder to
EagleFiler.

• The How can I put my library on my iPhone? section of the manual notes that EagleFiler works
with 1Writer²⁵¹.

• Added preliminary support for macOS 10.15 (which is now in beta).

• EagleFiler now plays movie files using AVFoundation instead of QuickTime. This improves per-
formance and offers compatibility with macOS 10.15, however some older files that use 32-bit
codecs will no longer be playable. You may be able to use IINA or VLC instead.

• Worked around a change in macOS 10.15 that prevented EagleFiler browser windows from open-
ing.

• The software updater now works on macOS 10.15.

• Brought back the old mailbox icon, as macOS 10.15 no longer has one built-in.

²⁵¹http://1writerapp.com

179


• Capturing from Apple Mail now works on macOS 10.15.

• Increased the maximum width of the # column so it doesn’t get truncated for mailboxes with
very large numbers of messages.

• Increased the maximum width of the Size column to prevent truncation with large font sizes.

• Improved the property descriptions in the AppleScript dictionary.

• Improved the identification and display of mailbox files that have malformed headers containing
NUL characters.

• EagleFiler now limits the amount of a text file to index, to avoid running out of RAM and hanging
the indexing process if you have a file that’s hundreds of MBs.

• There’s now a 10-second timeout when accessing the text content of a record via AppleScript
to prevent the user interface from hanging if PDFKit gets stuck. This is adjustable via the
TextToolScriptTimeout esoteric preference.

• Worked around an AVFoundation bug could cause internal errors when viewing an old movie file.

• Improved reporting of Python launch errors.

• Fixed a bug where a Web archive could open an ad window in Safari.

• Fixed a regression where the toolbar buttons for creating new records were inappropriately dis-
abled.

• Fixed a regression where the Mac App Store version of EagleFiler didn’t include the manual.

• Fixed an internal error when using the Drop Pad.

• Fixed a bug where importing a message with MailTags tags but no project could result in an
empty tag being applied.

• Fixed a bug importing notes with very long titles from Evernote.

• Updated to Python 2.7.16 and PyObjC 5.2.

1.8.7—April 3, 2019

• You can now import to EagleFiler using the Share button in Apple News.

• The keyboard shortcuts for the EagleFiler: Import and EagleFiler: Import With Options
services are now Command-Shift-1 and Command-Option-Shift-1 because the old shortcuts using
the number 5 conflict with the new Screenshot and recording options command in macOS
10.14.

• When capturing from Microsoft Outlook or Entourage, EagleFiler now preserves the message’s
to-do completed status as a tag.

• EagleFiler is better at reading malformed mbox files.

• Displaying AudioNote files is faster.

• When importing mail, if EagleFiler skips a message because it’s a duplicate or marked as deleted,
it will add a note to the mailbox explaining this, so that you don’t wonder why the message count
is different from what you saw in your mail program.

• When closing a library that has active operations in the Activity window, EagleFiler is better
at waiting until they have been canceled, so it’s less likely that you’ll get the alert sheet about
not being able to close the library because it’s busy.

• Improved indexing performance by skipping certain file types that could be slow and didn’t need
to be indexed, anyway.

• EagleFiler now integrates with Hook.

• Updated the How can I put my library on my iPhone? section of the manual.

180


• The import text and import plain text script commands now let you create an empty docu-
ment, e.g. if you want a blank file to send to another app for editing or to record some metadata.

• Improved the Tag PDFs that Need OCR script.

• Worked around a bug in macOS 10.14 that prevented EagleFiler from using Spotlight importer
plug-ins, leading to Excel, OmniOutliner, and other document types not being indexed.

• Worked around a Spotlight change in macOS 10.14.4 that prevented indexing from working.

• Worked around bugs in third-party Spotlight importers that returned the wrong type of data.

• Worked around a Quick Look bug that could cause hangs when clicking to view a record.

• Worked around an issue where macOS would offer to Quick Look a link in an e-mail, but doing
so would cause an internal error.

• Worked around a change in macOS 10.14 to restore the highlight ring when dragging and dropping
onto the records list.

• Importing an ENEX file that references a missing attachment no longer causes an internal error.

• Tried to work around a macOS bug that could cause a crash when closing a library.

• When capturing from Microsoft Entourage, EagleFiler now picks a default folder name rather
than failing if Entourage reports an error getting the folder name.

• EagleFiler now skips over damaged metadata files instead of halting the import with an error.

• EagleFiler now logs to Console if a file triggers slowness in a Spotlight importer, to help track
down problem files and importers.

• Fixed the colors in the quick entry text view when using Dark Mode.

• Fixed an internal error when parsing an invalid e-mail date that could lead to a mailbox not being
imported.

• Fixed a bug where some MIME text was not decoded properly.

• Fixed a bug where importing from MailTags 6 didn’t work.

• Fixed a bug where the capture key didn’t work with MarsEdit 4.

• Updated to Xcode 10.2.

• The Mac App Store version of EagleFiler no longer uses the hardened runtime, to work around
an App Review code signing problem.

1.8.6—February 4, 2019

• When importing from Evernote, EagleFiler now attaches any Optical Character Recognition
(OCR) results to the records as notes, so that you can search for printed and handwritten text
that had been extracted.

• Improved EagleFiler’s support for Dark Mode in the records list, record viewer, source list, and
options window.

• Bulk importing from the Files folder using Scan for New Files is much faster (than before and
also compared with other import methods), as EagleFiler no longer wastes time reading Spotlight
comments that don’t need to be copied. This is especially important on macOS 10.14, as its new
security features seem to slow down Apple event processing.

• Made various changes to improve viewing and scrolling performance in the records list, 
particularly
for large libraries with lots of media files that need to have previews generated.

• The source list is faster at displaying tags on macOS 10.14.

• EagleFiler now figures out the date if an e-mail message is missing the Date: header.

181


• Improved the following sections of the manual:

– Importing From iOS

– Importing Mail From Apple Mail

– Merge Mailboxes/Message Files

– Verify

• Improved the error message when EagleFiler is unable to launch.

• Worked around a bug where Outlook didn’t correctly report which messages were selected, leading
to no messages being imported by the capture key.

• Worked around a macOS bug that could make setting a file’s creation or modification date to
earlier than 1970 set the wrong date.

• Worked around a bug in macOS 10.14 that could cause a hang when importing a URL from Safari
via drag and drop.

• Worked around a problem where EagleFiler could import metadata that was invalid Unicode and
thus would cause an error when saving the database.

• Error logging works better with long error messages that exceed the macOS limit.

• Error logging now works with strings that cannot be converted to UTF-8.

• Fixed a bug where a Web page with an illegal Unicode byte sequence in the title might fail to
import.

• Fixed a bug where toolbar buttons would shift position when a label changed size, e.g. from
“Read” to “Unread”.

• Fixed a bug where JavaScript in a Web archive could open a new window in your browser without
any user interaction.

• Fixed a bug where the menu for hiding and showing table columns had an Import From iPhone
item.

• Updated the screenshots in the manual.

1.8.5—December 20, 2018

• Improved EagleFiler’s importing from Evernote. EagleFiler now converts the notes to macOS’s
standard Rich Text With Attachments (RTFD) format, preserving images and attached files, text
formatting, and metadata (tags, title, author, source URL, dates). This is further described in the
Import ENEX File. . . section of the manual. (In prior versions, importing created an uneditable
HTML file, and the attachments were separate EagleFiler records in a sidecar folder.)

• EagleFiler now supports importing using Continuity Camera (requires macOS 10.14). This is
described in the Import from iPhone Camera section of the manual.

• On macOS 10.14, you can import from Finder via a Quick Action. This is described in the
Importing via a Quick Action section of the manual.

• The capture key now works with NetNewsWire 5.

• You can now use PopClip to import the selected text into EagleFiler, as described in the Importing
via PopClip section of the manual.

• Plain HTML is now a supported Web page format for importing. This can be useful if you want
to preserve the original HTML text content but don’t want the overhead of a Web archive or
prefer to use a format that works in all browsers.

• The Convert for Editing command now works with HTML files (rather than just Web archives).

• EagleFiler now supports the Hardened Runtime on macOS 10.14.

182


• EagleFiler is now notarized by Apple.

• When importing via AppleScript, there is a new allowing duplicates option to temporarily
override the application-wide Allow duplicate files in library preference.

• The Import Files. . . command now explains that you can also import files by moving instead of
by copying.

• Added support for importing tags and notes from the forthcoming MailTags 6.

• Updated the following sections of the manual:

– Add Tags and Notes

– Importing iMessages

– Importing Mail From Apple Mail

– Security & Privacy Access

• Updated the Import Examples sample script.

• Opening the smart folder editor is faster.

• Importing pre-existing bookmark files is faster.

• Improved the responsiveness when typing.

• Improved the display of labels in Dark Mode.

• The About window now includes a link to the privacy policy and has an updated layout.

• EagleFiler reports a better error message when you are trying to manually import a mailbox from
Mail and EagleFiler lacks Full Disk Access.

• EagleFiler now directly opens the Full Disk Access tab of System Preferences to make it easier
for you to grant access.

• EagleFiler now includes a usage description when it requests Automation access on macOS
10.14.

• EagleFiler now stores damaged index files outside of its file package so that they easier to see 
and
delete to free up disk space.

• When importing an entire volume, EagleFiler now skips various invisible folders managed by the
system.

• Worked around a macOS bug that caused EagleFiler to get stuck importing certain Web pages
and neither finish nor time out.

• Worked around a macOS change that could cause an internal error when trying to replace text
in a PDF view.

• Improved the diagnostic report.

• Fixed a bug where status information in the viewer was sometimes displayed with the wrong
colors in Dark Mode.

• Fixed a bug where column titles or sort indicators could appear drawn on top of the arrow for
the table column pop-up menu in Dark Mode on macOS 10.14.

• Fixed a bug where EagleFiler would use the wrong text color in certain situations, e.g. white
RTF text in Dark Mode on macOS 10.14 or black text instead of the custom plain text color.

• Fixed an inconsistency with tab width in new plain text files or when switching from editing a
rich text one to a plain text one.

• Fixed a bug where, when using a newer version of WebKit, Web views didn’t unhighlight the old
search terms when you changed the query.

• Fixed a bug where empty Markdown files were not imported as text files if you had an application
installed that told the system they were not text.

183


• Fixed a bug where the EagleFiler Spotlight importer didn’t work with FoxTrot.

• Fixed a bug importing an Apple Mail .mbox folder via the To Import folder or the Files folder
folder. (However, importing via those folders tells EagleFiler to import the files as-is. It’s 
generally
better to use other import methods for such mailboxes to allow EagleFiler to convert them to the
standard mbox format.)

• Fixed a bug where EagleFiler would capture the first tab from Vivaldi, rather than the active 
tab.

• Fixed a bug where EagleFiler would import some iCloud temporary files (and then later complain
that they were missing).

• Fixed an internal error that could be reported during a background operation.

• Fixed an internal error that could occur when using the Copy Record Link command.

• Fixed a bug where EagleFiler could log an internal undo-related error when launching.

1.8.4—August 22, 2018

• macOS 10.14 has new data protection features that require the user to specifically grant applica-
tions such as EagleFiler access to do certain things. In general, you will want to grant EagleFiler
Full Disk Access as well as Automation access for Finder, Mail, Safari, and other applications
that you want to capture from. This is further explained in the Security & Privacy Access section
of the manual.

• Added support for Dark Mode on macOS 10.14. The viewer for plain text files (and plain text
e-mails) switches colors for dark mode, whereas RTF files and HTML e-mails do not because they
may override the background color in ways that are hard to read with the dark color scheme.

• The capture key now works with Apple Mail on macOS 10.14.

• EagleFiler is able to import more Web pages successfully because it now ignores timeouts and
certificate errors when loading subsidiary resources. Previously, a broken ad or tracker would cause
importing to fail. Now, EagleFiler makes a best effort (like a Web browser) so that importing can
succeed so long as the main page content loads without error.

• If you open an RTF file in TextEdit and add an image, TextEdit will convert it to RTFD format.
When you view the file again in EagleFiler, EagleFiler will now detect this renaming instead of
reporting the file as missing.

• Importing URLs in bookmark format is much faster.

• Bulk tagging operations from the Batch Change and Info windows and from the tags bar and
tag sources are much faster.

• The capture key now works with the Vivaldi Web browser.

• Compiled AppleScript files are no longer imported as plain text files; instead, EagleFiler 
displays
them as read-only, syntax-highlighted source code.

• EagleFiler now waits a bit longer after you open a library before starting the background opera-
tions, to improve responsiveness.

• The Import Bookmarks... command now skips over items in the bookmarks file with missing
URLs, rather than failing with an error.

• Made various user interface refinements and fixes for compatibility with macOS 10.14.

• The Export CSV script now uses UTF-8, so it should work with metadata that uses any characters.

• Updated the following sections of the manual:

– How can I put my library on my iPhone?

– Importing Mail From Postbox

184


• Added the WebToolRTFDomains esoteric preference, as described in Importing Web Pages and
URLs. This can help with importing from sites such as Twitter that don’t print properly.

• Added DisplayImagesWithQuickLook to the esoteric preferences for improved privacy control.

• EagleFiler will now log a more informative error if it can’t access the Spotlight comments due to
not having Finder Automation access on macOS 10.14.

• Worked around a bug in macOS 10.14 that prevented the open libraries from being remembered.

• Worked around a bug in macOS 10.14 that prevented saving bookmark files.

• Worked around a change in macOS 10.14 that could cause a library to open with some of the
source list items inappropriately collapsed.

• Worked around a bug in macOS 10.14 that prevented the selected source list item from being
properly indicated.

• Worked around a macOS 10.13 bug that could prevent keyboard input after closing the Help

menu.

• Worked around a macOS 10.13 bug that would cause a crash when indexing Excel or PowerPoint
documents.

• Worked around a SearchKit bug that could cause files not to be indexed.

• Worked around a macOS 10.13 bug that could cause an internal error when locating EagleFiler’s
data files.

• Removed the Open in Delicious command.

• Updated to version 1.3.12 of the SkimNotes framework.

• Fixed a bug where the capture sound didn’t play on macOS 10.13 or later.

• Fixed a bug where Scapple files would display as XML instead of showing a preview of the
document.

• Fixed a bug where Option-double-clicking a large selection of records (such that confirmation was
required) would open them in the external viewer instead of opening their source URLs.

• Fixed a bug where toggling text view options (such as spell checking) from the Info inspector’s
contextual menu didn’t work.

• Fixed a bug creating bookmark files from certain URLs.

• Fixed a bug where some content in HTML e-mail messages might not be indexed for searching.

• Fixed a bug where EagleFiler could report an internal error when asked to import a file that was
already in the library folder but which had not yet been fully imported.

1.8.3—March 28, 2018

• The capture key now works with the Evergreen²⁵² feed reader.

• Evergreen’s²⁵³ Share button now works with EagleFiler.

• Added support for capturing from beta versions of Opera 51.0.

• Improved the responsiveness when displaying HTML e-mail messages with remote images.

• EagleFiler can now import Apple Mail messages with attachments that are stored as pre-expanded
ZIP files. (Typically this happens when you send a message with a packaged document attached.)

• EagleFiler can now import malformed mbox files generated by Mail Archiver X.

• Changing the filename or other metadata via the contextual menu in the viewer is now more easily
undone.

²⁵²http://ranchero.com/evergreen/
²⁵³http://ranchero.com/evergreen/

185


• The system Quick Look previewer no longer supports chat archives from Messages and iChat, so
EagleFiler once again displays these using its own code.

• Added the Importing iMessages section of the manual.

• The Importing Mail From MailMate section of the manual now describes how to automatically
import all messages added to a particular mailbox.

• Updated the Reveal in Finder section of the manual to mention third-party Finder replacements.

• Added logging to hopefully track down bugs with NSFileManager and NSTextView.

• Fixed a bug where View ▷ Message ▷ Rich Text was not shown as checked when it was in
effect.

• Fixed a bug where a timeout loading a remote image could make the e-mail display without
formatting.

• Fixed a bug that could cause EagleFiler’s Spotlight importer to leave temporary files around when
it was invoked by FoxTrot.

• Fixed a bug where the collapsed state of the Tags source group was not restored.

• Fixed a bug where the accessory view when creating an encrypted library wasn’t centered.

• Fixed a crash reporter bug that could prevent some information from being logged.

• Improved the diagnostic report.

1.8.2—January 8, 2018

• Tag names can now contain spaces, which improves interoperability with Finder tags. The Search
Query Syntax has been updated to support using quotation marks around tag names with spaces.

• Adjusted the way tag auto-completion works so that it’s easier to enter new tags whose initial
characters are similar to existing tags but differ in case or diacritics. Previously, the system 
would
sometimes alter the initial characters that you had typed, making certain strings impossible enter
by  typing (though you could paste them).

• The system Share toolbar button (which we had to remove in EagleFiler 1.6.5) is once again
supported.

• Updated the following sections of the manual:

– How can I rebuild a library?

– How do Finder tags work with EagleFiler?

– Importing Mail From Apple Mail

– Services

• EagleFiler no longer tries to import iCloud Drive temporary files.

• Updated to version 1.3.8 of the SkimNotes framework.

• The section names in the source list are no longer in all caps, to match the current system apps.

• Renamed the To/Cc search scope to Any Recipient.

• Worked around a macOS bug that could cause text in the records list to be unreadably condensed
(with overlapping letters) when doing a search.

• Worked around a macOS bug where the paperclip icon for e-mail attachments didn’t always
respond to clicks. Instead, the attachment names are now clickable.

• Worked around a PDFKit issue that could prevent ejecting an encrypted library.

• Fixed a bug where Reply to Message would use the From address instead of the Reply-To address.

• Fixed a bug where a misleading error message would be presented if a secure connection could
not be made to the software update server.

186


• Fixed a bug where pressing Command-Delete while editing text in the records list would move
the selected record to the trash instead of deleting the text to the beginning of the cell.

• Modernized some font selection code.

1.8.1—October 19, 2017

• EagleFiler is now 64-bit only and requires macOS 10.7 or later.

• Added support for HEIC images.

• Sketch files are now displayed using Sketch’s Quick Look plug-in instead of just showing the file
icon.

• You can now paste Return-delimited tag names into the Tags fields. This can be helpful in concert
with selecting a range of tags and using the Copy command, as that generates Return-delimited
text.

• Increased the maximum width of the Title column.

• The How can I put my library on my iPhone? section of the manual now recommends the new
Files app in iOS 11, which can view and sync the tags on your EagleFiler files.

• Updated the Edit Smart Folder. . . and Export... sections of the manual.

• Worked around a macOS 10.13 bug that caused crashes in Core Animation.

• Worked around a macOS 10.13 bug where importing an Apple Mail message via drag and drop
could import an empty folder instead of the .eml file.

• Worked around a macOS bug that prevented large PDF files from displaying properly.

• Worked around an issue where macOS would add a color tag (which would then get synced into
EagleFiler) when you assigned a label.

• You can now assign the ef nometa tag to a folder to exclude it (and its subfolders) from metadata
backups.

• Added the MJTURLSetModificationDateOnCopy esoteric preference to have EagleFiler try to re-
pair lost file modification dates when importing to a NAS.

• EagleFiler no longer considers .7z message attachments to have unknown type.

• Improved the error reporting when importing a Web page.

• Worked around an internal error when opening a library window.

• When importing an Apple Mail message, EagleFiler no longer warns about missing message parts
that are actually present but empty.

• Fixed a bug where the Drop Pad could show no current library if you closed a library window
while EagleFiler was in the background.

• Fixed a bug where EagleFiler could report an internal error when Control-clicking on a row that
now longer exists.

• Fixed an issue on macOS 10.13 that could cause a hang when searching.

• Fixed an issue on macOS 10.13 that could prevent closing the library or quitting.

• Fixed a regression where there was too much debug logging when importing a Web page.

• Updated the German localization.

1.8—July 24, 2017

• EagleFiler is now compatible with macOS 10.13 (currently in beta).

187


• On macOS 10.13, EagleFiler uses APFS’s cloning feature. This can make importing large files
much faster and reduce the amount of disk space used, as the copies in EagleFiler’s library can
share the same disk blocks as the originals.

• Added the Message ▷ Use Quick Look command to the View menu, which enables EagleFiler
to display images that are attached to e-mails. Previously, only remote images were displayed;
attached images could (and can still) be viewed in the separate Quick Look window and by double-
clicking the message to open it in Apple Mail or another external viewer. The Message ▷ Plain
Text and Message ▷ Rich Text options are still available. These use EagleFiler’s mail engine,
which doesn’t yet support inline images but which provides more control over fonts and colors, as
well as additional searching and text features.

• The keyboard shortcut for Reply to Message has been adjusted to allow the View ▷ Message

shortcuts to be consistent.

• Added the Always Search All Records option to the search field menu. This lets you do a
global search without having to first select the Records source. If you commonly want to search
the entire library, enabling this option can save you that step as well as the step of re-selecting
the sources that you were viewing before the search, should you want to go back to viewing them.
This is described further in the Searching section of the manual.

• Importing Apple Mail messages is faster and requires less temporary disk space.

• It is now possible to use the records list and source list contextual menus without changing the
selection. This means that, for example, while editing a record’s note you can copy and paste
links to other records. (Previously, Control-clicking on the other record would change the target
of the inspector, making the note disappear.)

• The Info inspector now remembers the scroll position and selection of the notes text view when
you switch back and forth to another app.

• Updated the Quoted Text Colors presets to match the new colors that Apple Mail uses.

• On macOS 10.13, there is a new Show All Tabs command in the View menu.

• EagleFiler will now prevent you from creating files whose names are valid on APFS but not HFS+,
as such files cannot be backed up via Time Machine or copied/synced to an HFS+ volume.

• Metadata in JPEG 2000 e-mail attachments is now indexed for searching.

• Made various performance improvements.

• Updated the following sections of the manual:

– Importing Mail From Apple Mail

– New Record ▷ Open Stationery Folder

– Search Query Syntax

– Searching

– Shortcuts

– Web page format

• When importing from Apple Mail, EagleFiler can now detect and warn if a message is marked
as having separately stored attachments but EagleFiler didn’t find any references to them in the
message headers.

• EagleFiler no longer imports DEVONtech storage metadata files.

• The diagnostic reporter can now check whether the application package is damaged

• Removed a workaround for a PDF crash since the underlying bug seems to be fixed in macOS
10.13.

• Worked around a Web Kit change that prevented quoted text from being colored in rich text
e-mail messages.

188


• Worked around an OS bug that could make only the first of a group of messages dragged from
Outlook import into EagleFiler.

• Made various code modernizations.

• Fixed a bug where EagleFiler’s indexer could potentially get confused by the new nanosecond-
precision dates in APFS.

• Fixed a bug where the Tags inspector would look like it would let you delete an undeletable
built-in tag.

• Fixed a bug where certain types of Apple Mail mailbox hierarchies would cause EagleFiler would
report that attachments were missing when they weren’t.

• Fixed a bug where EagleFiler sometimes reported missing Apple Mail attachments using the
wrong path, so that it was not possible to open the message and get Mail to re-download the
attachments.

• Fixed a bug where EagleFiler did not import an attachment from an Apple Mail message when
the message’s only part was an image.

• Fixed a bug where column state changes made when a window was in full screen mode were not
saved.

• Fixed a bug where no RTF file was created if you entered metadata but no text in the Quick
Entry window.

• Fixed a bug where some text in the New Library. . . window was truncated due to OS font changes.

• Fixed a bug that could cause an internal error when trying to access the Open With menu while
a library was opening.

• Fixed a bug where text could wrap onto an invisible second line in the tag abbreviation column.

• Fixed bug where YouTube videos in Web archives didn’t play. (Note that the video content is
loaded on demand; it not saved in the Web archive file.)

• Fixed a bug that could cause an internal error when reporting errors.

• Fixed a bug that could cause an internal error when updating the Find panel.

1.7.6—April 18, 2017

• The x-eaglefiler custom URL scheme now supports a search option. The new Searching From
Other Applications section of the manual shows how to use this to initiate an EagleFiler search
from Alfred, LaunchBar, or other applications that support URL schemes. You can set up your
launcher app to search the current EagleFiler library as well as create shortcuts to open and search
specific libraries.

• Improved the Searching section of the manual.

• EagleFiler now follows the Match Partial Words setting when highlighting search matches in
the records list and in text and e-mail records. In other words, if you were searching for a whole
word, EagleFiler will no longer highlight instances of that word contained within another word.
This should reduce confusion about what was actually being searched for.

• Worked around a bug in macOS 10.12 that could make the File ▷ Open command open the
library behind an existing library’s window.

• Worked around a bug in OmniOutliner 5 that caused its compressed flat files to be imported as
text files. (The change takes effect for newly imported files or if you rebuild your library.)

• Worked around a PDF bug in macOS 10.12.4 that could cause a crash when opening a contextual
menu.

1.7.5—March 21, 2017

189


• For consistency with Finder, the New Browser Window command now always makes a new win-
dow. As before, when you open a library EagleFiler follows the system preference to decide
whether it should be tabbed, and you can use the + button in the tab bar or the New Tab
command to make another tab for an existing window.

• The Command-Up Arrow and Command-Down Arrow keyboard shortcuts no longer change the
selection in the records list when their corresponding menu commands (Enclosing Record and
Contents of Record) are disabled. This is consistent with Finder and should help prevent getting
lost when you reach the top or bottom of the hierarchy.

• When opening a record link, EagleFiler now deminimizes the window from the Dock, if necessary.

• When a file in a subfolder of the To Import folder is skipped because it’s a duplicate, it’s now
moved to the same relative location in the Unable to Import folder instead of the top level. This
should make it easier to figure out where it came from.

• Updated the Importing From iOS section of the manual.

• The Capture Not Supported window no longer shows the Show Drop Pad button if the

Drop Pad window is already visible.

• EagleFiler no longer tries to import metadata files for Dropbox’s Selective Sync feature.

• Acorn 5.6.4 fixes a problem that could cause Acorn to quit if it was launched as a result of
EagleFiler asking it to open a file.

• Improved the error reporting when moving files.

• Documentation and Help menu links to c-command.com now use https instead of http.

• Added the DeleteRecordsWithoutCommandKey esoteric preference, which prevents the Delete key
from accidentally moving records to the trash when the Command key is not down.

• Worked around a bug in Preview that could cause an internal error when importing a PDF page
via drag and drop.

• Partially worked around a bug in macOS 10.12 that could prevent some text from being properly
indexed for searching. If this was affecting you, you’ll need to rebuild the indexes to see a change
for existing records.

• Fixed a bug where typing Command-Delete in a text editor or text field could move the selected
record to the trash instead of deleting text to the beginning of the line.

• Fixed a bug where an internal error could occur if you emptied the trash while EagleFiler was
generating an icon preview.

• Fixed a regression where EagleFiler would sometimes show records list columns that had been
hidden.

1.7.4—February 27, 2017

• You can now capture entire mailbox hierarchies from within Apple Mail. To do this, select the
topmost mailbox (or mailboxes), make sure that no messages are selected, and press the capture
key. For more information, see the Importing Mail From Apple Mail section of the manual.

• EagleFiler now works with newer AudioNote files that are packages.

• Message display and indexing are faster, particularly for large .eml files.

• The Save Diagnostic Report... command in the Help menu now works with all versions of
macOS that EagleFiler supports.

• Added the Replace in Titles script.

• The How can I access my library from multiple Macs? section of the manual has more information
about Resilio Sync.

190


• Added the Share Extension section of the manual.

• EagleFiler no longer imports .sync or .ts folders, as they only contain metadata.

• EagleFiler now logs to Console when a message attachment is particularly slow to index, to help
identify problem files or Spotlight importers.

• Added the IndexMessageAttachments esoteric preference so that you can skip indexing message
attachments if Spotlight issues are causing indexing to get stuck.

• Added the UnindexedAttachmentExtensions user default, as described in the How does indexing
in EagleFiler work? section of the manual.

• Fixed an issue where the EagleFiler Import command was not available in Preview’s Share

menu.

• Fixed a problem where EagleFiler could lose track of a file if the library was stored in Dropbox
and Dropbox renamed the file in accordance with its filename limitations.

• Worked around a WebKit error when importing certain Web pages.

• Worked around an OS bug that prevented table column state from being saved.

• Worked around an OS bug that could cause a crash when using the Touch Bar.

• Worked around an OS bug that could cause a crash when creating a diagnostic report.

• Worked around an OS bug that prevented importing Mail messages via drag and drop if the
subject contained a # character.

• Worked around an OS bug that could cause an error when displaying a PDF file.

• Improved the workaround to prevent crashing due to a PDFView contextual menu bug on macOS
10.12.

• Made the task code more robust.

• Fixed a regression where some message attachments were not indexed.

• Fixed a bug that could cause an internal error when reporting an error.

1.7.3—January 10, 2017

• For new libraries created on macOS 10.12 or later, EagleFiler uses a different set of tag 
abbrevia-
tion symbols that are better suited for the Sierra fonts. You can use the Tag Abbreviation Style
AppleScript to change the symbols in a pre-existing library and to switch between different sets
of symbols.

• EagleFiler now supports the Touch Bar.

• Revised the toolbar icons for Unread and Read with a bullet and checkmark to make them more
clear.

• Worked around a bug in macOS 10.12 that caused resizing glitches when using tabbed windows.

• The text inspector bar is once again available, thanks to a crashing bug fix in macOS 10.12.2.

• When you’re editing a file in the record viewer, EagleFiler now auto-saves it every minute, rather
than only when you change windows or apps.

• SOHO Notes is no longer being developed, but you can import folders or individual notes from it
by dragging and dropping them onto EagleFiler’s Dock icon or into one of your EagleFiler library
windows. SOHO Notes customers can get a discount on switching to EagleFiler by e-mailing²⁵⁴
proof  of their purchase.

• The new Save Diagnostic Report... command in the Help menu provides an easier way of
recording error logs and other information to send to technical support (requires macOS 10.12).

²⁵⁴mailto:eaglefiler@c-command.com

191


• Improved the following sections of the manual:

– Applications That Support Capture

– How can I access my library from multiple Macs?

– Importing Mail From Apple Mail

– Remember open libraries between launches

– Set Label

– Show Info

– Show Tab Bar

– The To Import Folder

• Added some esoteric preferences for changing the colors EagleFiler uses for displaying plain text
files.

• Added NewPlainTextExtension to the esoteric preferences, which lets you change the extension
of new plain text files that EagleFiler creates on your behalf. For example, you could change it
from the default txt to md to create Markdown files.

• Added DefaultWebEncoding to the esoteric preferences.

• Work around various font metrics issues in macOS 10.12 to make tag abbreviation symbols display
properly in the source list and records list.

• Enlarged the triangle in the table column pop-up menus.

• Improved the error logging on macOS 10.12.

• Fixed a bug where the Open With menu did not show all of the available applications for file
types that some applications claim only by file extension, rather than UTI. For example, you can
now open Markdown files with Byword and iA Writer.

• Fixed a bug where window tabbing was allowed for auxiliary windows.

• Fixed drawing glitch that could cause black lines to appear at bottom of the window (macOS
10.12 and later).

• Fixed a bug where files imported from Evernote might not display with the proper encoding.

• Fixed a bug where capturing messages from a local Apple Mail mailbox sometimes didn’t work if
your Mac was not running in English.

• Fixed a bug where EagleFiler could incorrectly log an error about the Mac App Store receipt.

• Updated to Xcode 8.1.

• Updated the German localization.

1.7.2—October 17, 2016

• The Reveal button in the Errors window now works if multiple errors are selected. You can now
hold down the Option key to open the files instead of revealing them; this is useful for loading
attachments in Mail messages that were only partially downloaded.

• Added DisplayPDFsWithQuickLook to the esoteric preferences to let you work around bugs in
macOS 10.12’s PDFView.

• Improved the following sections of the manual:

– How can I run optical character recognition (OCR) on my PDFs?

– Importing From a Scanner

– Importing Mail From Apple Mail

– Show Tab Bar

192


• Worked around a change in the macOS 10.12 font panel that could cause the wrong variant of
the system font to be used when changing the font in the preferences.

• Worked around a bug in macOS 10.12 that could prevent the progress window from being centered.

• Worked around a badly worded OS certificate error when checking for a software update.

• Worked around a change in macOS 10.12 that messed up the positioning of tag abbreviations in
the source list.

• Worked around a change in macOS 10.12 that could cause the ruler to be shown when editing a
plain text file.

• Worked around an issue that prevented some errors from being logged to Console on macOS 10.12.

• Fixed a bug with the Apple Mail importer and the new mail store format on macOS 10.12 that
led to Missing Apple Mail Message Attachment errors.

• Fixed a bug where capturing from an On My Mac Apple Mail mailbox on macOS 10.12 didn’t
work if the Mac had not been previously running Mac OS X 10.11.

• Fixed a bug where the tab stops for the plain text editor didn’t auto-adjust for different fonts 
and
sizes.

• Fixed a bug where the tag abbreviation font in the source list didn’t match the records list and

Tags inspector.

• Fixed a bug where sometimes the Drop Pad or capture key would would incorrectly report that
no library was open.

• Fixed a bug where image titles were sometimes not properly imported and indexed.

• If EagleFiler is unable to find the messages to import from Apple Mail, it now logs the folders it
was looking for them in to aid in troubleshooting.

1.7.1—September 19, 2016

• EagleFiler no longer uses the text inspector bar on macOS 10.12, in order to work around a
crashing bug in the OS. In the event that the bug is fixed, you can re-enable the text inspector
using TextInspectorBar in the esoteric preferences.

• The system PDF view was rewritten in macOS 10.12, and there are still some bugs in the GM
release that affect EagleFiler:

– The PDF contextual menu is not available. This may be fixed in the official release of 10.12.

– Dragging to select PDF text sometimes selects the wrong range.

– Some longer PDF files display with blank regions when using Continuous Scroll mode.

• Worked around a bug in Mac OS X 10.11.6 that could cause internal errors and prevent the font
picker in the preferences from changing to a non-system font once a system one had been set.

• The mbox writer guards against newlines in the From line.

• Improved the following sections of the manual:

– Applications That Support Capture

– Importing Mail From Apple Mail

– How can I access my library from multiple Macs?

– How can I put my library on my iPhone?

• Updated to Xcode 8.

• Renamed “Mac OS X” to “macOS” throughout the app and documentation.

• Added the Sending in Crash Log Files section of the manual.

193


• Fixed a bug where search queries that included angle brackets could fail if Match Partial Words

was enabled.

• Fixed a bug where some URL importing errors were not reported if the format was set to PDF,
which led to the creation of blank PDF files.

1.7—August 12, 2016

• EagleFiler now supports tabbed windows (requires macOS 10.12). A single window can have
multiple tabs for either a single library or for different libraries. You can show the tab bar from
the View menu. There are commands to manipulate tabs in the Window menu. Clicking the

+ button in the tab bar creates a new tab for the current library, equivalent to the New Browser
Window command.

• Added support for capturing from Apple Mail on macOS 10.12.

• The Remove Duplicate Messages script now works if you have selected mailboxes in the source
list rather than the records list.

• Added the current records script property, which returns the selected records in the records
list or the source list, depending on which list has focus.

• The guid property on records is now available from AppleScript.

• When you use the Export... command to generate a new mbox file for the selected messages,
EagleFiler now uses Unix- instead of Mac-style linebreaks, since more e-mail products now support
the former.

• Made various code modernizations.

• EagleFiler now shows an empty Container column when the file is directly in the Files folder,
as this is more clear than showing Records.

• When reporting that a file is damaged, EagleFiler now shows the relative path rather than just
the filename, to make it clearer which file has a problem.

• The Errors window is better at displaying filenames containing slashes.

• EagleFiler reports a better error message if it finds that an Apple Mail message file is empty.

• On macOS 10.12, EagleFiler no longer shows its Select Next Tab and Select Previous Tab

menu items because they duplicate the new system ones.

• Made some changes to the way EagleFiler generates mbox files to prevent Thunderbird’s importer
from getting confused.

• Improved the following sections of the manual:

– How can I access my library from multiple Macs?

– Importing Mail From Apple Mail

– Importing Web Pages and URLs

– Sending in an Error Report

• Renamed “Mac OS X” to “macOS” throughout the app and documentation.

• Tried to work around an OS issue where sometimes libraries were not added to the Open Recent

menu.

• Fixed a bug reading messages that have DOS linebreaks, which could lead to exported mbox files
not importing properly and could affect the display and indexing of certain messages.

• Worked around an OS bug that could cause files in the To Import folder not to be imported
promptly.

• Fixed a bug where EagleFiler did not launch on macOS 10.12.

194


• Fixed a bug that caused EagleFiler to report an error when opening a library on macOS 10.12.

• Worked around an OS bug that caused problems for tag completion using composed character
sequences.

• Added a workaround for a PDFView crashing bug in macOS 10.12. To enable it, click this link²⁵⁵.

• Fixed a regression where tagging from the Record menu didn’t work.

• Fixed a bug where edits to a record’s tags could be lost if you moved it without the tags bar
losing focus.

• The distribution disk image is now signed.

1.6.9—May 23, 2016

• The Applications That Support Capture section of the manual now describes how in Mac OS X

10.11.5 you need to check Enable JavaScript From Apple Events in order for EagleFiler to
capture the selected Safari text as a note attached to the Web page.

• When importing from Apple Mail, EagleFiler will now report an error if some of the messages
could not be found because they were missing from Mail’s data store. This could simply mean
that Mail has not finished downloading those messages and that you should try again shortly.

• If a message’s date sent is not readily available, EagleFiler now uses the date received (rather
than the current date) when generating the mbox file’s “From ” line.

• EagleFiler will now log an error in the unlikely event that it finds two records that reference 
the
same file. This condition can be fixed by rebuilding the library.

• Made various code modernizations.

• Improved the following sections of the manual:

– Allow duplicate files in library

– Backup Metadata

– Importing Mail From Mailsmith

– Importing Web Pages and URLs

– Library Folders

• Fixed a bug where messages in mailboxes could not be exported to .eml files via drag and drop.

• Fixed a bug where EagleFiler sometimes didn’t skip importing duplicate e-mail messages.

• Fixed a bug and worked around an OS issue that could cause unnecessary updating of EagleFiler’s
metadata backup files, leading to extra storage use and network traffic.

• Fixed a bug that could cause EagleFiler to crash when indexing a message with malformed headers.

• Fixed a bug that could lead to leaking system pasteboard resources.

• Fixed a regression (perhaps due to an OS bug) where the Info and Tags toolbar buttons were
inappropriately disabled.

• Fixed a regression where Option-clicking the Tags toolbar button did not open the Tag Cloud

window.

• Fixed an issue where capturing from Safari didn’t work if Safari Technology Preview 1 was running
at the same time.

• Fixed a bug where the “replied” and “sent” tags were not imported from Mailsmith.

• Fixed a regression where the fallback MIME text decoder didn’t work.

• Fixed a bug that could cause EagleFiler to report an error about an “EmptyViewer,” e.g. when
importing.

²⁵⁵x-eaglefiler://default?k=ReleasePDFDocuments&v=NO

195


1.6.8—March 10, 2016

• EagleFiler can now capture from Numbers and Microsoft PowerPoint.

• Capturing from Apple Mail is faster when you have a large mail store.

• EagleFiler now auto-hides and shows the ruler, like it does the text inspector bar, so that it’s 
not
shown when you aren’t editing an RTF file. Among other benefits, this prevents the alignment
and spacing buttons from moving back and forth between the ruler and the text inspector bar,
depending on whether the latter was shown.

• You can now double-click a smart folder as shortcut for Edit Smart Folder  Option-double-click

to get the old behavior of opening a new window with that smart folder selected.

• When transferring the search query from the main window to the Find panel, EagleFiler now
strips any * wildcard characters so that you can more easily use the Find Again command.

• Copying and pasting an e-mail message from EagleFiler to the Finder now creates a standard

.eml file rather than a Mail-proprietary .emlx file.

• You can now improve the importing of certain Web pages (e.g. Twitter or Discourse-powered
forums) by selectively disabling JavaScript for certain domains. This is described in the Importing
Web Pages and URLs section of the manual.

• Added the Append Creation Date to Filename script.

• Improved the following sections of the manual:

– Importing Mail From Apple Mail

– Importing Mail From MailMate

– Importing Web Pages and URLs

– New Library. . .

– Open Source URL

– Open With

– Searching

• The record viewer no longer shows the text inspector bar when Allow Editing in Record Viewer
is unchecked. This prevents unwanted shifting of the window content and works around a text
selection problem.

• When importing from Apple Mail, EagleFiler no longer makes an unnecessary copy of each of
Mail’s Attachments folders. This used extra temporary disk space and could cause the import to
fail unnecessarily in the event of a file permissions problem.

• EagleFiler now skips importing all files whose names begin with ~$ because they are probably
Microsoft Office temporary files.

• When capturing from Apple Mail, if there’s an error finding the mailbox on disk, EagleFiler now
presents a more helpful error message.

• Improved the error reporting when a Mac App Store receipt cannot be found.

• Improved the error reporting for the Software Update  command.

• Worked around an OS bug that prevented changing the search highlight and quote colors on Mac
OS X 10.10 or later.

• Fixed bugs where the iWork and Microsoft Office capture scripts didn’t work with the latest
versions of those apps.

• Fixed a bug where EagleFiler couldn’t capture from local Apple Mail mailboxes on Mac OS X

10.11 if the Mail installation was fresh, rather than upgraded from a previous version of Mac OS
X.

196


• Fixed a bug where text of the selected items in the source list could be hard to read when 
dragging
and dropping onto another item.

• Fixed a bug where Mac App Store receipts would not validate if the Mac’s language was set to
Hebrew.

1.6.7—January 22, 2016

• EagleFiler now waits to show the text inspector bar until you actually start editing an RTF
document. This prevents it from repeatedly hiding and showing as you browse through a bunch
of records.

• If you press the capture key in the Notes app, EagleFiler will now show some instructions for
importing from Notes.

• If you press the capture key in Reeder²⁵⁶, EagleFiler will now suggest how you can set up a hotkey
in Reeder for importing into EagleFiler.

• EagleFiler’s metadata backup files are now named .EagleFiler Metadata.plist. The initial
period prevents them from cluttering file lists in iOS and Web services that don’t respect the
traditional Mac flag for marking files as invisible.

• Added the Importing From iOS section of the manual.

• Improved the following sections of the manual:

– Applications That Support Capture

– Copy tags to Spotlight comments

– How can I access my library from multiple Macs?

– How can I back up my EagleFiler data?

– How can I put my library on my iPhone?

– Importing Mail From Apple Mail

– Importing Mail From Webmail/Gmail

– Importing Web Pages and URLs

– Mac App Store

– Merge Mailboxes/Message Files

– Searching

• In the contextual menu for the record viewer, you can now hold down the Option key to change

Set Filename to Set Filename and Title.

• If a file with a source URL is damaged or missing, you can now use the Open in Browser button
in the Errors window to view the Web page (and perhaps import it again).

• The Quick entry command is now AppleScriptable.

• Added the Group Records script.

• Added the Date From yyyymmddhhmmss Filename script.

• Added the Import Some Safari Tabs script.

• The Convert Plain Text to Rich Text and Convert Rich Text to Plain Text scripts now demonstrate
how to use the create temporary folder script command.

• The New Record and Label toolbar buttons now adjust if you choose the small toolbar size
(requires Mac OS X 10.11).

• EagleFiler now preserves the creation date when importing a folder.

• EagleFiler no longer imports Prism files as text files.

²⁵⁶http://reederapp.com

197


• When setting the selected records via AppleScript, EagleFiler will now change the selected source
if the specified records aren’t in the current records list.

• Faster indexing of media file e-mail attachments.

• Metadata backups now include a transientRecordID field.

• Improved the help message and error reporting when EagleFiler is unable to capture from Outlook.

• EagleFiler now logs to Console if doesn’t find all of the expected Apple Mail messages to import.

• Added RecordsListShowToolTips to the esoteric preferences.

• Added ImportTitleFromFileContents to the esoteric preferences.

• Added IndexingUsesAttributeModificationDate to the esoteric preferences.

• Worked around an OS issue that could cause an error when importing from Yoink.

• Worked around a rare problem where EagleFiler would sometimes erroneously report that there
was no library open when you pressed the capture key.

• Worked around an OS bug that could cause problems (incorrect metadata or missing content)
when importing multiple Web pages as PDFs in quick succession.

• Worked around a change in Mac OS X 10.11 that caused the .eml Spotlight importer to not
import any text.

• Worked around an OS bug that could cause a crash when using the contextual menu when viewing
a PDF.

• Worked around some issues with Outlook 2016 that could cause capturing to not work.

• Worked around an Xcode bug that could cause a table header drawing glitch on Mac OS X 10.10.

• Updated code for Xcode 7.2.

• Fixed a bug where importing text via AppleScript could cause duplicate imports and an internal
error on Mac OS X 10.11.

• Fixed a bug in the URL importing error handling code.

• Fixed a bug where setting the filename from the contextual wasn’t undoable.

• Fixed a bug displaying a e-mail message with an empty HTML part.

• Fixed a bug where Mac App Store receipt validation used the current date rather than the receipt
creation date.

• Worked around a Finder bug that could cause the disk image’s icons to be misaligned if the

AppleShowAllFiles option was enabled.

• Fixed the size of the distribution disk image window.

1.6.6—September 29, 2015

• EagleFiler is now fully compatible with Mac OS X 10.11 El Capitan.

• The Fonts panel now has a menu for selecting the system font. This lets you use San Francisco
on Mac OS X 10.11, even though it is not selectable in the regular system Fonts panel. If you
select a system font using the new menu, EagleFiler will adapt to always use the system font
for the version of the operating system that you’re currently running. In contrast, if you select
Lucida Grande or Helvetica Neue, the font will stay fixed.

• The About, Software Update, and help windows now use the San Francisco font on Mac OS
X 10.11.

• Modernized code for the Xcode 7 compiler and the Mac OS X 10.11 SDK.

• Added support for App Transport Security on Mac OS X 10.11.

198


• Added full support for indexing .ics and .vcf files attached to e-mail messages.

• Mac OS X 10.11 no longer includes the formail tool, so EagleFiler now includes its own copy.
The Remove Duplicate Messages script has been updated accordingly.

• The capture key now works with Apple Mail on Mac OS X 10.11.

• You can now use the Find panel in the notes text view.

• Optimized indexing of .bmp files attached to e-mail messages.

• Added more message attachment file types that can be indexed.

• The Polish velarized L is now treated like other accented characters for the purposes of indexing
and searching.

• EagleFiler no longer tries to extract text from unknown message attachment types. This should
make indexing faster and speed up searching using Match Partial Words by not filling the
index with junk terms.

• Refined the search index’s definition of terms to make searches more accurate and to reduce index
bloat.

• Improved the following sections of the manual:

– How does indexing in EagleFiler work?

– Importing Mail From Apple Mail

– Importing Mail From MailMate

– Importing Mail From Outlook

– Importing Web Pages and URLs

• When extracting a file’s contents for indexing, EagleFiler will now abort if it hasn’t finished 
after
a few minutes, to work around a bug in Mac OS X 10.10’s PDF reader.

• Added some esoteric preferences to work around hangs and crashes caused by the OS’s built-in
support for .docx files.

• Worked around an OS bug that could cause a single-page PDF to be initially scrolled down, when
viewing in Continuous Scroll mode.

• Worked around a bug in Mac OS X 10.11 that could cause a crash during Software Update....

• Worked around a Tidy bug that could cause a crash when indexing HTML e-mails.

• Worked around a bug in Mac OS X 10.11 that could prevent EagleFiler from capturing from
Apple Mail.

• Removed the application icon from the Open With menu title because it caused the text to appear
too dark.

• Fixed a bug where menu items with attributed titles had the wrong font size.

• Fixed a bug where the sample text in the Preferences window’s font chooser text fields would
sometimes get cut off.

• Fixed a bug where the contents of <NOFRAMES> tags could be displayed in HTML views.

• Fixed a bug where Software Update... would continue offering updates in the same session you
had held down the Option key.

• Fixed a bug where including square brackets in a search query could prevent EagleFiler from
finding the relevant records if Match Partial Words was enabled.

• Fixed a regression where indexing certain types of files didn’t work on Mac OS X 10.6.

• Fixed a bug where EagleFiler did not reindex a record’s source URL if you changed it via Apple-
Script.

199


• Fixed a regression that caused some mailbox files to be imported as text files.

• Fixed a bug where EagleFiler wouldn’t always rebuild a missing mailbox index file.

1.6.5—June 2, 2015

General

• Made various optimizations so that EagleFiler is faster at viewing and searching large numbers
of records.

• The Add Link.../Edit Link... command in the The Format Menu now has a keyboard
shortcut of Command-K.

• On Mac OS X 10.10, Helvetica Neue is now the default font for the source list. This can be
overridden in the preferences.

• Improved the fonts in the About and Software Update windows.

• The secondary sort in the records list is now always the date, which should be more useful
and predictable.

• Added accessibility label in the Software Update new News windows.

• Updated and improved the following sections of the manual (among others):

– Batch Change...

– How can I access my library from multiple Macs?

– How can I encrypt my files?

– Importing Mail From Apple Mail

– Importing Mail From Outlook

– Importing Mail From PowerMail

– New Library. . .

– New Record ▷ Plain Text File

– New Record ▷ Rich Text File

– Reinstalling a Fresh Copy

– What Can Be Imported

• Mac OS X 10.10 removed support for the Share toolbar button, so now EagleFiler only
displays it on Mac OS X 10.8 and 10.9.

• Updated the Close & Lock toolbar icon.

Importing

• Improved importing of old Apple Mail mailboxes.

• EagleFiler no longer tries to import Libre Office lock files or NSData temporary files.

• TouchDraw files are no longer imported as text files.

• When capturing from Outlook, EagleFiler is better able to handle delays or failures of Outlook
to return a message’s headers.

• When capturing from Preview, EagleFiler now reports a better error if the capture failed
because the document had not yet been saved.

• When importing selected Web text via Services, if the source URL is a nonsensical value
EagleFiler no longer sets it as the source URL or appends it to the RTF text.

• Added the CaptureNotSupportedJustBeep esoteric preference.

AppleScript

• It is now possible to import from the clipboard via AppleScript.

• You can now get and set the current library (e.g. for capturing purposes) via AppleScript.

• Updated the sample AppleScripts to use universal type identifier instead of kind.

200


• The Import Examples script now shows how to create a PDF service.

• The Import From Outlook script now preserves flags and categories from Outlook as tags in
EagleFiler.

• Added the Date From Filename script.

• Added the Delete Empty Folders script.

• Added the Tag PDFs that Need OCR script.

Error Handling

• If the system fails to save the list of files to be opened, EagleFiler will now retry. This should
fix a problem where you would tell EagleFiler to open a library and nothing would happen.

• If EagleFiler detects that one of its files is missing, i.e. that the application is damaged, it
now presents a better error message.

• Improved the error reporting when a temporary folder cannot be created.

• Improved the error reporting when a metadata backup fails.

• EagleFiler will now automatically recreate the Trash folder if it is missing.

• If the The To Import Folder gets deleted after the library is already open, EagleFiler will now
automatically recreate it.

• Improved the error handling when the system doesn’t provide the proper data for drag and
drop.

• Better handling of memory errors when backing up metadata.

• Added logging to track down the source of an error when indexing files.

• EagleFiler now shows a better error message if you enter an invalid name when creating a
new library.

• EagleFiler will now clear a library’s temporary items folders when opening the library, so that
unneeded files don’t build up if the library was not cleanly closed.

• Reworded the “Forget” alert.

• Added esoteric preference to disable Growl in case of crashes.

Bug Fixes

• Worked around a bug in Mac OS X 10.10 that could cause the name of the selected source to
be unreadable when the source list didn’t have focus. (The name may still be unreadable if
you toggle the Reduce transparency setting in the Accessibility preferences pane while
your library window is open.)

• Worked around a toolbar button validation bug on Mac OS X 10.6.

• Fixed a bug where logged timings were inaccurate.

• Fixed a bug where some user interface text was shown in the wrong font on Mac OS X 10.10.

• Fixed a bug where Microsoft PowerPoint files (and some other files that did not have 64-bit
Spotlight importers) were not indexed.

• Fixed a bug where importing via AppleScript and asking for options did not return the
imported record when using the text, plain text, or stationery parameter.

• Fixed a bug on Mac OS X 10.10 importing selected text from Apple Mail via Services where
importing took a long time, the Web archive was not directly viewable, and the filename was
a  UUID.

• Fixed a bug where some Markdown files were imported as mailboxes instead of as text files.

• Fixed a regression that could cause an error when emptying the trash.

• Fixed a bug where EagleFiler would incorrectly think that files with upside-down Unicode
characters were missing.

• Fixed a bug checking volume case sensitivity.

201


• Fixed a bug redirecting text editing key commands to the record viewer.

• Date formatters now use the POSIX local where appropriate.

1.6.4—January 26, 2015

• Tagging lots of records at once is much faster.

• Emptying the trash is much faster.

• Updated the Web archive to PDF script for compatibility with EagleFiler 1.6.3 and later.

• Added improved instructions for installing and running supplemental AppleScripts.

• Updated and improved the following sections of the manual:

– Copy Record Link

– How can I access my library from multiple Macs?

– How can I put my library on my iPhone?

– How does indexing in EagleFiler work?

– Importing From a Scanner

– Importing Mail From MailMate

– Library Folders

• If Outlook is slow to respond when capturing, EagleFiler now logs some information to Console
to help diagnose the problem.

• Worked around a bug in Mac OS X 10.10 that could prevent changing fonts from the Preferences

window.

• Worked around an OS bug that prevented bookmark files from being resolved.

• The About EagleFiler window now uses the new system font on Mac OS X 10.10.

• The About EagleFiler window now uses the system language names when crediting localizers, to
reduce the number of strings that localizers need to keep up-to-date.

• Increased the font size in the Software Update... window on Mac OS X 10.10.

• Fixed a bug where setting a record’s tags via AppleScript didn’t always work properly for non-
ASCII tag names.

• Fixed a bug capturing from Outlook when there were empty messages.

• Fixed a bug where capturing didn’t work with newer versions of Together and Yojimbo.

• Fixed a bug where temporary files from indexing were not cleaned up promptly.

1.6.3-November 17, 2014

• Added an EagleFiler Import command in the system Share menu for importing URLs to
EagleFiler (requires Mac OS X 10.10). You can hold down the Option key to have EagleFiler
bring up its options window before importing.

• Modernized lots of code and removed old code that’s no longer needed for compatibility with
legacy OS versions.

• Made lots of optimizations to improve EagleFiler’s performance and reduce its memory use. Some
highlights are:

– Indexing e-mail messages is faster, particularly for messages containing attached files of com-
mon types.

– Indexing e-mail HTML messages is much less I/O intensive, which should make EagleFiler
more responsive on Macs with spinning disks.

– Syncing tags with the Finder is faster.

202


– Optimized the date formatter to work around a performance regression in Mac OS X 10.10.

• EagleFiler now reports to Notification Center when it finishes an import.

• If you are importing a URL and specify a title in the options window, the title is now used for
the filename as well.

• The Command-Tab switcher will now change you to the space containing the current main window,
rather than staying on the current space if the Drop Pad was already visible there.

• Improved compatibility with MailTags.

• Improved compatibility with BitTorrent Sync.

• The Backup Metadata command now backs up the creation date, modification date, and file label.
EagleFiler does not restore these, since they might be older than the values in the filesystem, but
they  are now in the backup to enable possible restores in the future when files are passed through
a lossy cloud.

• EagleFiler is better able to import and merge malformed mbox files that have leading whitespace.

• EagleFiler is better able to recover from a variety of file ownership and permissions problems.

• If EagleFiler encounters empty messages when capturing from Outlook, there is now an option to
skip all of them so that you don’t have to click a button for each message.

• It is now possible to disable tag syncing on a global or per-library basis. This is described in 
the
How do Finder tags work with EagleFiler? section of the manual.

• Added the Copy Notes to Spotlight Comments script.

• The How does indexing in EagleFiler work? section of the manual now describes some new logging
options that you can use to isolate the source of the problem if searching or indexing is slow.

• Added the following sections to section to the manual:

– How can I rebuild a library?

– Importing Mail from Airmail

– Save PDF to EagleFiler

• Updated and improved the following sections of the manual:

– How can I access my library from multiple Macs?

– Importing Mail

– Importing Mail From PowerMail

– Importing Web Pages and URLs

– The To Import Folder

– Updating From a Previous Version

• Added EnableJavaScriptForWebTool to the esoteric preferences.

• Esoteric preferences links are now directly clickable in the Apple Help and PDF manual.

• Re-rendered the library document icon so that it looks sharper and to work around a display bug
on Mac OS X 10.10.

• Common types of tag syncing errors are now reported more concisely.

• Adjusted some of the toolbar icons for Mac OS X 10.10.

• Updated the disk image icon for Mac OS X 10.10.

• Updated Gatekeeper signature format.

• Adjusted the way the Purchase. . . window displays the remaining demo time to try to make it
clearer.

203


• The Purchase. . . window now accepts serial numbers copied and pasted from a PDF of an order
confirmation, after the browser has transliterated the dashes.

• Improved handling of localized strings when the application is damaged.

• Improved error reporting when EagleFiler can’t connect to the update server.

• The Software Update... feature is better at explaining what you can do if installation fails.

• Improved the crash reporter’s error reporting.

• Fixed a bug where the release notes in the Software Update... window were shown in the wrong
font.

• Worked around a bug in Mac OS X 10.10 that could cause crashes when indexing HTML e-mail
messages.

• Worked around a bug in Mac OS X 10.10 that could prevent changing the hotkeys.

• Worked around a bug in Mac OS X 10.10 that prevented the creation of encrypted libraries.

• Worked around a bug in Mac OS X 10.10 that could cause EagleFiler to freeze at launch.

• Worked around an Xcode bug that caused EagleFiler to complain in Console about missing images.

• Fixed a bug where capturing from Vienna 3 didn’t work.

• Fixed a regression where the Info window didn’t update if you edited a cell in the records list.

• Fixed a possible cause of an error when checking the locations of files in the library.

• Fixed a regression where the Info window didn’t look right if no browser window was open.

• Fixed a bug where EagleFiler could crash or be very slow when there were a lot of icon thumbnails
to load.

• Fixed a bug where EagleFiler would try to import invisible Dropbox support files.

• Fixed a bug where smart folders could incorrectly include the containing folder in the list.

• Fixed a bug where the NonTextExtensions default didn’t work.

• Fixed several typos when capturing from Outlook.

• Updated the localizations.

1.6.2—May 14, 2014

• It is now possible to import via drag and drop when multiple tags are selected. EagleFiler will
assign all of the selected tags to the imported files.

• EagleFiler now displays animated GIF files as videos, instead of showing the first frame as a 
static
image.

• More image/photo metadata is now indexed and, thus, searchable.

• The Verify command can now detect and repair bad file permissions and ownership.

• EagleFiler now uses power assertions to prevent App Nap from slowing user-initiated operations
when the window is in the background or blocked by the screensaver.

• Each library now has an independent queue of operations so, for example, a small import into
one library no longer has to wait for another library’s large import to complete.

• Made further optimizations to the Open With menu to make EagleFiler more responsive during
typing.

• When operations are in progress and you tell EagleFiler to empty the trash, it now waits a bit
longer before aborting. This lets it successfully empty the trash if said operations were almost
done.

• Opening a library whose search index has been reset or deleted is much faster.

204


• Movies and audio files are now indexed using AVFoundation rather than QuickTime.

• The characters ’‘‘’’‘’ are now allowed in tag names.

• Modernized lots of code and removed old code that’s no longer needed for compatibility with
legacy OS versions.

• Added the Import Safari Tabs and Shorten Path scripts.

• Added the How does indexing in EagleFiler work?, Where is my EagleFiler library?, How can
I back up my EagleFiler data?, and Importing Mail From Mail Pilot sections to the manual.
Updated the How can I access my library from multiple Macs?, How can I put my library on my
iPhone?, and Importing Mail From Outlook sections.

• The images in the PDF manual and Apple Help are now Retina-resolution.

• Adjusted the font sizes in the PDF manual.

• Added AlwaysShowNewRecordSheet and DrawColoredLabelRowBackgrounds to the Esoteric Pref-
erences.

• It is now possible to silently skip the capture warning when Apple Mail is busy.

• EagleFiler now skips importing MailMate’s .emlh files.

• If the indexer crashes due to a WebKit bug, EagleFiler now tries a second method of indexing.

• EagleFiler now restores the label if there’s an error setting the Finger tags.

• Made various improvements to EagleFiler’s error logging.

• Worked around an OS bug that could cause a crash when indexing certain Web archive files.

• Reduced RAM use when indexing Web archives.

• Fixed a bug where EagleFiler could erroneously think that a file was missing if it was imported
via Scan for New Files and had certain non-ASCII characters in its name.

• Fixed a glitch with the Errors window toolbar when reporting certain types of mail import errors.

• Fixed a bug where Import Bookmarks... would sometimes import duplicate URLs where there
were none.

• Fixed a bug where Import Bookmarks... would incorrectly skip importing some URLs when using
the Bookmark Web page format if you had Allow duplicate files in library unchecked.

• Fixed a bug indexing PDF files that contained nil strings.

• Fixed a bug where capturing messages from Apple Mail sometimes created the mailbox inside an
extra folder layer.

• Fixed a bug where a record being edited in the Info window could have its changes prematurely
committed, resulting in its removal from the selected smart folder (if the changes made it no
longer match the smart folder’s criteria).

• Fixed a bug where modification and creation dates older than 2000-12-31 were not properly
displayed.

• Fixed a bug where tagging a large number of records was slow.

1.6.1—December 19, 2013

• EagleFiler now syncs tags with the system when running on Mac OS X 10.9 Mavericks. Tag
changes made in EagleFiler show up in the Finder and in other applications, and vice-versa. This
is described more in the How do Finder tags work with EagleFiler? section of the manual. The
first time you open a library on Mavericks, EagleFiler will sync its tags to the Finder. This will
mark the files as modified, which will trigger a one-time re-indexing of all the files (but not mail
messages) in your library.

205


• The Characters button in the Tags window now opens the EagleFiler Tag Symbols Web page,
which shows all the emoji and symbols in one place, rather than the system character picker.

• EagleFiler is faster at indexing folders, at searching, and at sorting records by tag.

• Improved the indexing of RTF, HTML, and plain text files attached to e-mail messages.

• TextExpander Fill-In Fields²⁵⁷ now work when editing the Title, File, or From in EagleFiler’s
records list.

• EagleFiler is better at detecting database corruption in Microsoft Outlook and better at importing
from damaged databases.

• EagleFiler will now try to repair damaged e-mail messages before importing or merging them, to
ensure that you end up with a valid mailbox file.

• If you try to open a large number of files, EagleFiler now checks to make sure that’s what you
meant to do (to avoid opening lots of unwanted windows).

• The Close & Lock and New Folder. . . commands are now available in the toolbar, rather than
just in the menu bar.

• The Continuous Scroll, Single Page, and Two Pages are now available in the View ▷ PDF

submenu, rather than just in the contextual menu.

• When using the Find panel in a PDF, EagleFiler now shows an animated indicator to draw
attention to the matching text.

• The capture sound now plays using the output settings for sound effects²⁵⁸.

• Improved the display and searching of newer-format AudioNote²⁵⁹ files.

• Added the EnableJavaScriptForMail esoteric preference so that you can work around WebKit
crashing bugs when displaying HTML e-mails.

• EagleFiler will now report an error if you try to open a library and the volume is running low on
free space (such that it might not be able to save the changes that you make).

• The Spotlight importer now works better with FoxTrot²⁶⁰ and Mac OS X 10.9.

• Crash reports for eftexttool now show which file it was working on.

• Worked around a bug in Mac OS X 10.9 that can cause a crash when indexing a Web archive.

• Worked around a Core Animation bug in Mac OS X 10.8.5 that could cause a black box to be
displayed on top of PDFs.

• Worked around a bug in Mac OS X 10.9 that could cause PDFs to display partially scrolled down.

• Fixed a bug where ePub files could be imported as text files.

• Worked around OS bug that could cause a -600 error when opening a file in another application.

• Worked around a bug in Evernote that could cause files to be imported with question mark
characters (U+FFFD) instead of tabs.

• Fixed a bug where using Scan for New Files to import a PDF file with no extension would create
a duplicate record with a missing file.

• Fixed a regression displaying file sizes larger than 4 GB.

• Fixed a bug where some errors when opening a library were logged but not displayed to the user.

• Fixed threading bug when indexing that could lead to an internal error being reported.

²⁵⁷http://www.smilesoftware.com/help/TextExpander/fillins.html
²⁵⁸http://weblog.rogueamoeba.com/2013/09/12/playing-sound-effects-the-right-way/
²⁵⁹http://luminantsoftware.com

²⁶⁰http://www.ctmdev.com/foxtrot/

206


• Fixed a bug where new files would not be indexed if you had created an ef noindex tag but not
assigned it to any files.

1.6—August 2, 2013
Highlights

• The user interface is now optimized for Retina displays. Most of the icons have been enhanced
or replaced.

• There are new toolbar buttons for creating plain text files, creating new files from stationery,
setting a file’s label, opening the Tag Cloud window, and accessing the system Share menu.
Various toolbar buttons have been combined into pairs.

• Made a variety of improvements so that the operations that happen after you open a library
are faster and have less impact on foreground responsiveness. This includes loading file
metadata, checking whether the indexes are up-to-date, checking for missing files, and copying
tags  to OpenMeta and Spotlight comments.

• Improved the display of the following file types: Microsoft Excel, Microsoft PowerPoint,
Keynote, Numbers, Pages, OmniOutliner, podcasts, chats, SVG files, Pear Note documents,

.emlx files, images, and more.

• When searching a selected folder or tag, EagleFiler now also searches the folders and mailboxes
inside that folder, or the subtags of that tag. (The old behavior of only searching one level
can be restored by unchecking Search Contained Folders/Mailboxes/Tags in the search
field menu.)

• Added support for negative tag searches via the - or ! syntax. For example, you can do a
Tags search for unread -flagged to find the unread records that are not flagged. Or you can
do an Anywhere search for tag:!apple steve to find records containing the word steve
that do not have the tag apple.

• When you create a new file inside a smart folder, EagleFiler now applies the smart folder’s
actions to it (e.g. to assign tags, set the label, or move it to a particular folder).

Importing

• EagleFiler’s capture key now works in Evernote²⁶¹. You can use the EvernoteCaptureFormat

esoteric preference if you only want to capture a link to the Evernote items.

• The New Record ▷ From Clipboard command now works when the clipboard contains an
image. In this case, it creates a PNG file instead of an RTF/RTFD file.

• The user interface no longer blocks while EagleFiler checks the To Import folder.

• When importing, EagleFiler will now correct PDF files that are missing their extension.

• EagleFiler will now detect if Microsoft Outlook doesn’t export the body data for a message,
which can happen with messages imported from the Windows version of Outlook. You can
choose to import just the message’s headers or to skip the message and import it in another
way.

• Added support for AudioNote²⁶² files.

• When importing a Web page fails, EagleFiler is better at reporting which resource was the
problem.

• When fetching a URL that’s redirected (e.g. via a feed proxy) EagleFiler now stores the final
URL as the source URL, as this is more meaningful.

• The Importing Web Pages and URLs section of the manual now explains how you can set
EagleFiler to process Web pages using the Instapaper Mobilizer before importing them.

• Updated the instructions for making Preview scriptable.

²⁶¹http://evernote.com
²⁶²http://luminantsoftware.com

207


Mail

• When importing, files with title “Untitled” are now treated as having no title, so that the
title is linked to the filename.

• When you capture a single selected e-mail message, EagleFiler now imports it as a .eml
file, rather than as a mailbox containing only one message. This can be changed via the
ImportLoneMessageAsMailbox esoteric preference.

• The Remove Duplicate Messages script lets you remove duplicate e-mail messages from a
mailbox.

• EagleFiler can now open e-mail messages with Sparrow²⁶³.

• EagleFiler now shows a warning if you ask it to extract a large number of messages from a
mailbox file to individual .eml files (as this is inefficient).

• If you capture a selection of messages that includes (exact) duplicates within the same mail-
box, EagleFiler now skips them. (Since recent versions of Apple Mail hide duplicates, it may
not be evident that you had any selected.)

• Improved the speed of capturing from Outlook, Entourage, Mailsmith, and PowerMail.

• When displaying a mailbox imported from a Mailman²⁶⁴ archive, EagleFiler can now undo
Mailman’s anti-spam measures to display the proper e-mail addresses.

• Added the Import From Outlook script.

• If there’s an error importing the tags for a message in Outlook, EagleFiler now offers to option
to skip the tags and import just the message itself.

Viewer

• EagleFiler is much more responsive when you’re typing.

• The record viewer now restores its state (scroll position and insertion point location) if you
edit the file in another application and then switch back to EagleFiler.

• EagleFiler can now repair certain damaged Apple Mail messages so that they display properly.

• The keyboard shortcut for highlighting text is now Command-Control-H (to match Preview).

Source List

• Updated the source list appearance, added Show/Hide buttons for the groups, etc.

• The Records icon now shows whether or not your library is encrypted.

• The source list contextual menu now has a Paste Icon command to more easily set custom
icons for folders.

• Added NetNewsWire-style arrow key support: press Right Arrow in the source list to go to
the records list; press Left Arrow in the records list to go to the source list.

Records List

• Dragging a record to another application now drags the record’s file rather than a link; if you
need a link, use the Copy Record Link command.

• Icon thumbnails for images are now loaded in the background and cached for better perfor-
mance.

• Added support for LaunchBar’s Instant Send²⁶⁵ feature.

• The File column can now accommodate longer filenames.

• When a window is in the background, EagleFiler no longer draws the label color for selected
rows across the entire row.

• Added the CommandOToOpenRecord esoteric preference, which lets you swap the keyboard
shortcuts for Open External Viewer and Open Library... so that.

²⁶³http://sparrowmailapp.com
²⁶⁴http://www.gnu.org/software/mailman/
²⁶⁵http://www.obdev.at/resources/launchbar/help/InstantSend.html

208


Errors

• If a file is missing after a Verify, you can now click the Trash button in the Errors window
to delete it, without having to first reveal the record in the library.

• The Errors window now shows the full relative path for files that are missing.

• EagleFiler now reports separate errors for missing vs. damaged notes, and for a missing note
it can now show and reveal the file where the note was expected to be.

• If there are records in the trash whose files are missing, EagleFiler will now offer to 
auto-delete
them when opening the library.

• EagleFiler now updates the paths in the Errors window when you move a record.

• It’s now possible to Trash multiple records at once from the Errors window. You can no
longer move files to the trash that are already in the trash.

• The crash reporter can now make recommendations for you based on the contents of the crash
log.

AppleScript

• If you import via AppleScript with no library open, EagleFiler will now report an error back
to the script instead of just logging it.

• Capture scripts can now override the Web page format. (See Writing Capture Scripts.)

• Documents now have an element for their windows.

• Tag objects now have an element for the records with that tag. This is much faster than
using an AppleScript whose clause.

• Querying the scripting properties of large numbers of records is much faster now.

• Added the create temporary folder script command, to make it easier to write scripts
that process files.

• Added the add folder script command, which makes it easier to create a new, empty folder
in a library.

Miscellaneous

• EagleFiler now requires Mac OS X 10.6.8 or later.

• EagleFiler now tells the system that it can use the integrated GPU, which should reduce
battery use on newer MacBook Pros.

• The progress bar for loading the library is now determinate. Eliminated the delay between
when the progress bar was removed and the window was ready for use.

• Added preliminary support for tags on Mac OS X 10.9 Mavericks.

• When opening a library, EagleFiler now checks for missing note files, rather than just missing
files.

• If you have a file that’s troublesome or slow for EagleFiler to read, you can tag it ef noindex
to prevent EagleFiler from trying to index it. There’s also a new UnindexedAttachmentNames
default.

• When backing up metadata, the Activity window now shows the relative path of each folder,
rather than just the name.

• When displaying folder names in menus, EagleFiler now colors them according to their labels.

• EagleFiler no longer changes a file’s modification date when you only modify the metadata.

• EagleFiler now remembers which type of date was selected in the Info window.

• EagleFiler now displays file sizes using the system standard style (requires Mac OS X 10.8 or
later), and the file sizes themselves are more accurate.

• If an indexing process gets stuck, you can now see in Activity Monitor which file it was
working on.

209


• Quick Look and scanning for new files work better with symlinks.

• The Read and Flag toolbar items now have a fixed width so they don’t cause the other
buttons to move when the label changes.

• The Purchase window now shows a user icon that indicates whether it’s a single- or multi-
user purchase.

• The disk image is now optimized for Retina displays.

• Made various improvements to the manual.

• Added a link to the forum in the Help menu.

• Improved the localizations.

Bug Fixes

• Fixed a bug with the quoted text coloring for e-mails containing DOS-style line breaks.

• Worked around an OS bug that could cause EagleFiler to freeze when selecting a Web archive
if a search was active.

• Fixed a bug importing from Apple Mail where EagleFiler would sometimes complain that no
viewer window was open when the Mail Perspectives plug-in was installed.

• Fixed a bug capturing from Contacts.

• Fixed a bug where the Highlight button was enabled when it shouldn’t have been.

• Fixed a bug where the PDF toolbar buttons weren’t always enabled correctly.

• Worked around an OS bug that could cause various operations to fail if a folder contained a
very large number of files.

• Fixed a bug where some information in the About EagleFiler window was displayed incor-
rectly.

• Fixed a bug where sometimes EagleFiler was unable to capture local Apple Mail messages
when running on Mac OS X 10.8.

• Worked around a bug in Mac OS X 10.8 that could prevent EagleFiler from importing a large
batch of messages from Entourage, Mailsmith, Outlook, or PowerMail.

• Automatic software updates no longer fail if Hazel²⁶⁶ is set to move files in the Downloads

folder.

• Fixed a bug where the Spotlight importer would report errors when running on OS X 10.8.

• Fixed a bug where some OmniOutliner²⁶⁷ documents displayed as garbled text.

• Worked around a problem where Apple Mail could time out when importing lots of messages
at once.

• Worked around a bug in Mac OS X 10.8.2 that could cause EagleFiler to freeze when importing
a file or changing a tag.

• Fixed a bug where EagleFiler sometimes would not delete temporary files promptly when
importing from Apple Mail.

• Fixed a bug where error logging didn’t always work properly on Mac OS X 10.8.

• Fixed a bug in reporting errors when opening a library.

• Worked around an OS bug that could cause Spotlight comments to be lost when using the

To Import folder.

• Fixed a bug where it was possible to end up with two equivalent tags whose names had
different Unicode normalizations.

• Worked around an OS bug that could cause EagleFiler to capture the wrong file from the
Finder.

• Worked around some PDF and icon display bugs that were introduced in Mac OS X 10.7.4.

²⁶⁶http://www.noodlesoft.com/hazel.php
²⁶⁷http://www.omnigroup.com/products/omnioutliner/

210


• Fixed a bug handling errors if the software update failed; if it succeeded, the .dmg file is now
deleted.

• Fixed a bug where an error message when displaying a text or RTF file could be editable.

• Fixed a bug pasting tags into the fields in the Actions tab of the Edit Smart Folder. . .
window.

• Fixed a bug where “Tags contains all” in smart folders could incorrectly find a record that
was missing one of the tags (if that tag was not assigned to any records).

• Worked around an OS bug that could cause the records list to lose focus when hiding and
showing EagleFiler.

• Fixed a bug where the source list sometimes had focus when using the contextual menu in
the records list.

• Worked around an OS bug that could cause errors when auto-completing tag names.

1.5.10—May 9, 2012

• The contextual menu Set Filename/From/Title commands are better at handling line breaks.

• It is now possible to move records to the trash by pressing Delete when multiple tags are selected
in the source list.

• The text fields in the smart folder editor make better use of the available window width.

• Improved the Importing Mail From Outlook section of the manual.

• Added the Importing Mail From MailMate section of the manual.

• Improved the What information should I include when I report a problem? section of the manual.

• Documented the TextInspectorBarStayOpen and UseOpenMetaRecentsForCompletion esoteric
preferences.

• Added the Check for News... command to the EagleFiler menu of the Mac App Store version.

• Worked around a WebKit bug that could cause freezes when highlighting matching search terms.

• Worked around a bug in Apple Mail that could lead to importing two copies of certain messages.

• Worked around a problem where broken Mac OS X installations couldn’t report full error infor-
mation.

• Fixed a bug that could cause uncommitted changes in the tags bar to be lost.

• Fixed a bug that could cause an error when the Quick Look window was open.

• Fixed a bug where an incorrect error message could be displayed when capturing from Apple Mail.

• Reduced the memory use of the Spotlight importer.

• Improved the reporting of file permissions errors.

• Worked around an OS bug that could cause a crash in Curio.

• Worked around bugs in Mac OS X 10.7.4 that could cause smart folders and PDFs to not display
properly.

1.5.9—February 21, 2012

• Improved the error message that EagleFiler displays if you try to capture from Apple Mail when
it’s busy. You can now click Capture Anyway if you’re sure that Mail is not busy with the
messages you’ve asked EagleFiler to import.

• EagleFiler can now capture from Hibari²⁶⁸.

• EagleFiler is now code-signed using a Developer ID certificate for Gatekeeper.

²⁶⁸http://hibariapp.com

211


• When printing a text or RTF file, fixed the font size and fixed a bug that could result in an 
extra
blank page being printed.

• Fixed a slowdown and crash that could occur when opening a library with lots of tags.

• Fixed an error when using the Quick Look panel if the toolbar had been collapsed into a menu.

• Fixed a bug where EagleFiler would report an internal error if there was a problem reading a text
attachment.

• Fixed a bug where the Info and Tags toolbar buttons would be disabled under rare circumstances.

• Fixed a regression that could lead to logged error messages about setting OpenMeta tags on a
non-existent note file.

• Fixed a bug where sometimes EagleFiler would rename the main thread.

1.5.8—January 24, 2012

• EagleFiler can now import rich text copied or dragged from Firefox and Google Chrome.

• Made various optimizations to improve the responsiveness of the user interface, particularly when
resizing the main browser window.

• Searches by Filename, Title, From, and To/Cc, as well as matching in smart folders, are now
diacritic-insensitive. For example, you can now search for resume and find r´esum´e. (Anywhere
and Notes searches have always been diacritic-insensitive.)

• Added the Copy Filename, Copy File Path, and Copy File URL AppleScripts.

• Added support for Growl notifications via GNTP (requires Mac OS X 10.7 or later).

• When printing an image, EagleFiler will now center it and scale it down, as necessary, to fit the
paper.

• The Import From Apple Mail script now works in Full Screen mode on Mac OS X 10.7 Lion.

• EagleFiler now skips importing temporary files for Microsoft Excel and invisible files from 
Integri-
tyChecker²⁶⁹.

• Tried to work around a bug in Mac OS X 10.6 that could cause EagleFiler to open multiple copies
of the same library.

• The update checksum script command is now synchronous, and it gains an optional for param-
eter that takes a list of records. This is much faster for bulk operations.

• When rebuilding a library, EagleFiler now restores all the tags, not just the ones that were in 
use.

• EagleFiler is better at checking fallback locations when reading OpenMeta tags.

• EagleFiler is better at handling errors when setting OpenMeta tags.

• Fixed a bug where EagleFiler could crash after a token field malfunction.

• Fixed a bug importing the selected Web text from newer versions of Safari Reader.

• Fixed a bug displaying e-mail messages when the Source URL column was shown.

• Fixed a bug where the color of newly created tags could be set to white instead of black.

• Fixed a bug where the wrong tag could be applied if you clicked a checkbox in the Tags inspector
while renaming a tag.

• Fixed a bug that could lead to a tag temporarily not showing in the source list after changing its
position in the hierarchy.

• EagleFiler’s reporting of unexpected errors is now more detailed and more robust.

²⁶⁹http://diglloydtools.com/integritychecker.html

212


• The Importing Mail From Outlook section of the manual now explains how to use a smart folder
to capture mail from multiple Outlook folders at once.

• The manual now specifically recommends telling iWork applications to include previews with their
documents.

• The direct build of EagleFiler is now code-signed, too.

• Cache folders for EagleFiler’s helper tools now have a reverse domain name prefix.

• The preferences for the Apple Mail capture script are now stored in the main EagleFiler 
preferences
file.

• Launched applications no longer inherit EagleFiler’s Python environment variables, which could
cause problems if they also used Python.

1.5.7—December 7, 2011

• Added support for Growl 1.3²⁷⁰.

• Added support for importing hierarchies of mailboxes from Apple Mail on Mac OS X 10.7 via
drag and drop from the Finder.

• The Import From Instapaper via NetNewsWire script lets you quickly import all your new In-
stapaper²⁷¹ articles into EagleFiler.

• The Replace in Filenames (Regex) script lets you batch-rename files using regular expressions.

• On Mac OS X 10.7, EagleFiler supports emoji tag abbreviation pictures.

• Various operations, such as arrow-keying through the records list, are faster and more 
responsive.

• EagleFiler can now display previews for OmniGraffle documents that are internally compressed.

• Added the PrefersRichText esoteric preference, which can be used if you want the EagleFiler:
Import service, Import From Clipboard, and New Record ▷ From Clipboard to create
plain text files instead of rich text files.

• The commands in the Go menu now bring the focus to the source list for more predictable
keyboard navigation.

• Improved capturing of large batches of messages from Microsoft Outlook.

• The Info inspector can now be opened via Command-I as well as Command-Option-I.

• Records now have a universal type identifier scripting property, which should make certain
kinds of AppleScripts much easier to write.

• Pressing the Esc key will now cancel editing in the source list or records list (for consistency 
with
Finder).

• Clarified the error message when importing non-standard-format archive mailboxes from Apple
Mail.

• You can now use the ImportSkipFilenamePattern default to specify a regular expression. When
EagleFiler imports a folder, any files whose names match the pattern will be skipped.

• EagleFiler no longer maintains the same default note text between multiple invocations of Capture
with options. This behavior can be reversed via the RememberCaptureNotesState default.

• Fixed a bug where, in rare cases, files imported via the To Import folder were incorrectly thought
to be duplicates if they had the same names as files that had been previously imported and
recently moved.

• Fixed a bug where an AppleScript would hang if it tried to start a scan for new files while 
another
scan was already in progress.

²⁷⁰http://growl.info
²⁷¹http://www.instapaper.com

213


• Fixed a bug where EagleFiler sometimes thought that files whose names ended with a period were
missing.

• Fixed a bug reporting Spotlight importer errors.

• Fixed a bug where the contents of the Quick Look window weren’t always updated before it was
shown, leading to flicker.

• Fixed a bug importing locally stored Web pages.

• Fixed a problem with saved view state and Full Screen mode.

• Fixed a bug that could cause a crash if there was an internal error launching a helper tool.

• Fixed a bug where the = character wasn’t always treated as a word separator in phrase searches.

• Added logging to help track down tag completion errors.

• Updated the French localization.

• Added a 1024×1024 application icon.

1.5.6—October 2, 2011

• Adjusted the fonts, styles, and colors in the Tag Cloud window so that it’s easier to read.

• EagleFiler’s viewer displays more information for vCard files: categories, notes, 
phonetic/maiden/related
names, related dates, social network profile URLs, etc.

• Added the Remove Duplicate Files script.

• Added the Import From Scanner script. Save this script as an application and set it as the target
of your scanner software (e.g. the Fujitsu ScanSnap Manager). When you scan a file, EagleFiler
will prompt you to enter a title and other metadata and then import the scan into your library.

• EagleFiler’s capture key now works with Opera 11.50.

• It is now possible to empty a library’s trash via AppleScript.

• When editing plain text or RTF files on Mac OS X 10.7, EagleFiler no longer uses atomic (a.k.a.
safe) saving because this exposes bugs in Lion’s file versioning feature, causing interoperability
problems with applications such as TextEdit if you’re editing the same file in more than one
application at a time.

• EagleFiler now takes you out of search mode when you click on a different source. You can restore
the old behavior via the ClearSearchWhenChangingSources esoteric preference if desired.

• Added the PDFWebBackgrounds esoteric preference, which can be used to prevent EagleFiler from
drawing colored backgrounds when importing a Web page in PDF format.

• Added the ErrorsOpenForDuplicates esoteric preference.  Normally, EagleFiler will open the
Errors window when a file has been skipped during an import because it’s a duplicate. However,
you can also set EagleFiler to log the error without opening the window, for example if you expect
there to be duplicates and don’t care to see them reported.

• Added the TextToolSkippedNames esoteric preference so that it’s now possible to skip indexing
of files that cause Core PDF to hang.

• EagleFiler is better at closing a library while operations are in progress.

• Worked around an OS bug so that EagleFiler is once again able to capture from smart mailboxes
in Apple Mail.

• EagleFiler’s Spotlight importer plug-in works better with FoxTrot²⁷².

• The default plain text font is now Menlo 11 rather than Monaco 10.

²⁷²http://www.ctmdev.com/foxtrot/

214


• Fixed a problem where the window title would be too long if you had a large number of sources
selected.

• Fixed a bug where the update checksum scripting command did not work recursively on folders.

• Fixed a bug that could in rare circumstances cause EagleFiler to create two records for a single
file.

• Fixed a bug importing a legacy/archive Apple Mail .mbox package via Scan for New Files.

• Fixed a bug where EagleFiler wouldn’t give up on rebuilding a mailbox when the file didn’t exist.

• Updated various screenshots and documentation.

1.5.5—August 4, 2011

• Fixed some bugs that could prevent EagleFiler from capturing messages from Apple Mail under
Mac OS X 10.7 Lion (particularly if Mail contained a large number of messages or an IMAP path
prefix was in effect).

• Added text editing toolbar for setting the font, style, size, etc. when editing rich text 
documents
(requires Mac OS X 10.7 Lion).

• EagleFiler is now able to capture from Apple Mail when it’s in Full Screen mode. However, due
to limitations of the OS, capturing will not work in Full Screen mode if you have multiple Mail
viewer windows open.

• Updated the Using EagleFiler’s Capture Key From Preview instructions for Mac OS X 10.7 Lion.

• Added the Refetch Web page script, which can be used to convert bookmarks to Web archives (or
other formats), to download the latest versions of pages that may have been updated, and more.
Any existing metadata that you’ve added is transferred to the new files.

• The Word Count script now shows the number of words in the current selection, as well as the
total number of words in the document.

• Added the MediaStylePDF esoteric preference so that it is now possible to override the stylesheet
that EagleFiler uses when saving a Web page as a PDF.

• It is now possible to replace a library’s Files folder with an alias to redirect it to another 
location.

• When opening a large batch of files in Preview, they now appear in a single window, and this also
avoids a -1712 error that Preview would report when told to open the files individually.

• The Import Bookmarks... command now works with format-html files from Pinboard that have
no file extension when downloaded by certain browsers.

• When creating a new mailbox file, EagleFiler now assigns it HFS type ’TEXT’ so that Entourage
and Outlook will know that they can import it.

• Updated the Export... instructions for Outlook.

• Removed NOT from the documented search syntax, since it doesn’t work with Match Partial
Words. Instead, you should use - or ! to exclude matches that contain a particular word.

• When using Reveal in Library in the Errors window, the relevant browser window is now
brought to the front.

• EagleFiler no longer adds a list of recent libraries to its Dock menu when running under Mac OS
X 10.7 Lion, since this is now a built-in feature of the Dock.

• Improved the indexing of Microsoft Office documents.

• Improved various error messages when capturing.

• Fixed a bug where the Import Bookmarks... feature would create a tag with a blank name if the
bookmarks did not have any tags.

215


• Fixed a bug where the contextual menu in the Tags window didn’t work under Mac OS X 10.7
Lion.

• Fixed a bug where capturing from NetNewsWire didn’t work if the item had no title.

• Fixed a bug with smart folders that use source URL criteria.

• Reduced EagleFiler’s memory usage by removing a workaround for a PDF bug that seems to have
been fixed in the final release of Mac OS X 10.7 Lion.

• The manual now explains how to open the Library folder on Mac OS X 10.7 Lion.

• Fixed a bug where EagleFiler’s Spotlight importer for .eml files didn’t work properly under Mac
OS X 10.7 Lion. Now, it works, although its functionality is limited due to sandbox restrictions.

• Fixed a bug with re-personalizing via an x-eaglefiler URL.

1.5.4—June 23, 2011

• Added the Import Bookmarks... feature, for importing from Delicious, Pinboard, and browsers
such as Safari. EagleFiler will preserve the tags, titles, and descriptions that you’ve set, as well
as the original bookmarking date.

• EagleFiler can now capture from the Cruz²⁷³ Web browser.

• EagleFiler can now capture the current tab from the NewsRack²⁷⁴ RSS reader. It saves the
selected text in a note.

• When capturing from NetNewsWire, the selected Web page text is now saved in a note.

• EagleFiler now works in full screen mode on Mac OS X 10.7 (Lion).

• When importing from Safari Reader (via drag and drop or the service), EagleFiler can now detect
the proper URL for the original page.

• Made some changes so that Web pages imported as PDFs no longer have duplicate copies of
certain dynamic elements such as ads.

• Importing Web pages as PDFs is faster.

• You can now type Command-Return (or Enter, as before) to dismiss the Capture with options,
Quick entry, and Batch Change... dialogs.

• Added keyboard shortcuts for switching between the tabs in the Capture with options and Quick
entry windows.

• When dragging from the records list or the source list to the Finder, EagleFiler now copies the
file by default. You can hold down the Command and Option keys before starting the drag in
order to create an alias (the old behavior); this can be useful when assembling a burn folder.

• Added instructions for importing individual messages from Postbox and Thunderbird.

• Added the Rename for Dropbox/Windows script.

• Wrote the Change Rich Text Font script for changing the font across multiple existing RTF or
RTFD documents.

• The Scan for New Files feature now supports the UnscannedFilenames default so that you can
set certain filenames that will always be ignored by scans.

• Pressing Return in the source list now edits the name of the selected item, rather than opening
it in a new window.

• Added the RespectImageDPI esoteric preference, which can be used to improve the display of
images that do not have the correct resolution set, thus making them appear way too small.

²⁷³http://itunes.apple.com/us/app/cruz/id402357089?mt=12&at=10l6nc&ct=cruz
²⁷⁴http://www.omz-software.de/newsrackmac/

216


• The Reveal in Library button in the Errors window now selects the record in an existing
window instead of opening a new one. This makes it much faster to deal with “Missing File”
errors. The RevealInLibraryNewWindow esoteric preference is available for those who prefer the
old behavior.

• The viewer pane now displays custom icons for bookmarks, which is useful if you’ve used setWe-
blocThumb²⁷⁵.

• It is now possible to set the Date Added via AppleScript.

• It is now possibly to specify the Web page format when importing a URL via AppleScript.

• EagleFiler now caches file attributes for longer, which should speed up some smart folders and
sorting operations.

• Improved compatibility with Mac OS X 10.7 (Lion).

• Improved responsiveness when dragging and dropping text into EagleFiler.

• EagleFiler now allows the colon character in tag names.

• Improved the display of messages that erroneously declare themselves to be both HTML and plain
text by treating them as HTML.

• It is now possibly to exclude certain filenames and extensions from indexing if this is necessary 
to

work around buggy Spotlight importer plug-ins. This is controlled by the 
SpotlightImporterSkippedNames

and SpotlightImporterSkippedExtensions defaults.

• If there is a crash while importing a folder from the To Import folder, EagleFiler will now 
“resume”
importing it into the same folder the next time the library is opened. Previous versions would
instead import the remaining files into a second folder, leaving you with two partial hierarchies
instead of one complete one.

• Made various improvements to EagleFiler’s error logging.

• If you try to move a file into a folder that no longer exists, EagleFiler now reports a regular
“Missing File” error for the folder, rather than an internal error.

• Adjusted the help page titles to fit better in the menu and search results.

• Made an optimization so that menus pull down more quickly. (More work in this area is in
progress.)

• Worked around a WebKit bug that could (in rare cases) cause EagleFiler to save the content of a
Web page before it had completely finished loading.

• When capturing from Apple Mail, EagleFiler now reports a better error when no messages are
selected.

• Fixed a problem where EagleFiler would not detect certain captured messages in a mailbox if
Entourage or Outlook had exported them with malformed headers.

• Fixed a bug where the Close & Lock command sometimes mentioned the name of a library that
had already been closed.

• Fixed a small memory leak when indexing .eml files.

• Fixed a bug where the EagleFiler: Import With Options service would sometimes import as
plain text instead of rich text.

• Fixed a bug where EagleFiler sometimes didn’t completely close a library after its last window
was closed.

• Made various changes to try to work around a crash that could occur when there’s an error
emptying the trash.

²⁷⁵http://hasseg.org/setWeblocThumb/

217


• Fixed a bug where the Info window might not load correctly if it had been open the last time
EagleFiler quit and no library was open.

• Fixed a bug where the browser window was sometimes not brought to the front when re-opening
recent libraries.

1.5.3—March 17, 2011

• Choosing Print now always prints the contents of the record viewer, even if it doesn’t have focus,
since this what most people want most of the time. To print the source list or records list, hold
down the Option key.

• Improved EagleFiler’s responsiveness when indexing e-mail attachments.

• Optimized various operations when selecting and dragging large numbers of records.

• When importing a hash-bang URL²⁷⁶, EagleFiler is better able to save the dynamically loaded
content into the Web archive.

• Improved the display of Web archives that use JavaScript to load and format their content.

• Improved compatibility with pre-release versions of Apple Mail.

• Improved the speed and accuracy of searching large numbers of mailboxes.

• Added the EnableJavaScript esoteric preference, which can be used to turn off JavaScript when
displaying Web pages.

• The Verify section of the manual now has some advice for how to recover from errors.

• EagleFiler now logs its errors to the system log database rather than a separate log file.

• Added another workaround to prevent crashes when importing or indexing due to a bug in Mac
OS X 10.6.

• To avoid duplicates and infinite loops, EagleFiler no longer follows folder symlinks when 
importing.

• Fixed a bug where multiple copies of a library could be loaded if you clicked several 
x-eaglefiler

links before EagleFiler had launched.

• Fixed a bug where Scan for New Files could start importing a folder and growl before all of its
contents had been imported.

1.5.2—January 25, 2011

• Made some optimizations so that typing in the viewer and in text fields is more responsive.

• Made some changes to hopefully work around a bug in Mac OS X 10.6 that, for some users, had
been causing intermittent crashes when importing lots of files.

• When importing due to Scan for New Files or the To Import folder, EagleFiler now skips symlinks.
This prevents accidentally referencing files outside the library folder.

• Added the Reload OpenMeta Tags AppleScript.

• Worked around a problem with the eDrawings Viewer Spotlight importer plug-in that could cause
indexing to hang.

• Added accessibility titles to the Preferences window.

• Improved the German localization.

• EagleFiler is now code-signed.

• Fixed a bug where changes in the tags bar could be lost if you were viewing a Web archive and
moused over a link.

²⁷⁶http://www.tbray.org/ongoing/When/201x/2011/02/09/Hash-Blecch

218


• Fixed a bug where file sizes in the records list were not displayed using base-10 megabytes when
running on Mac OS X 10.6.

• Fixed a bug where setting the basename property via AppleScript wasn’t undoable.

• Fixed a regression where EagleFiler could not import a file whose name contained a colon unless
it was running on Mac OS X 10.6.

• Fixed a bug where the scan for new files script command returned before it was actually
possible to close the window.

• Fixed a bug where EagleFiler would let the JavaScript in a Web archive close the window.

• Fixed a bug where clicking on a tag toolbar button or in the Tag Cloud discarded changes made
in the Info window’s tags field.

• Fixed a bug where the tagging toolbar buttons didn’t work if certain fields in the Info window
were in edit mode.

• Fixed a regression where fields in the Info window could be incorrectly enabled when there was
a multiple selection.

• EagleFiler will now note in the log if a file was modified in the future, as this can prevent 
indexing
from completing.

• Common types of errors when setting OpenMeta tags are now logged more concisely.

• No longer logs errors when Quick Look fails to generate a preview.

• If a damaged index file prevents a search from completing, EagleFiler now shows the search results
that are available and logs an error, rather than confusingly making it look as though you weren’t
searching at all.

• The build number is now available as a tooltip on the version number in the about box.

• Fixed a bug where the Spotlight indexer didn’t work for .eml files with CRLF linebreaks.

• Worked around a Finder problem that could prevent capturing from MarsEdit.

• Fixed a bug where the Open With contextual menu item didn’t work when EagleFiler was in
the background.

• Fixed a regression where capturing didn’t work with Safari 3.

1.5.1—December 15, 2010

• EagleFiler no longer tries to import cache folders created by beta versions of Dropbox.

• Fixed a bug where tag winnowing didn’t work properly with no folder selected.

• The progress text field below the source list now has a tooltip so that you can read it when the
text is truncated.

• Fixed a bug where uncommitted changes to the Info window’s tags field weren’t saved when
switching to another application, if multiple records were selected.

• Fixed a bug where changing the tags sometimes didn’t take effect if you were concurrently editing
in a tags field.

• Fixed a bug where tag changes in the Info window didn’t take effect if you closed the inspector
before doing anything else.

• Fixed a bug where tag auto-completion in the Info window didn’t work when multiple records
were selected.

• Fixed a bug that could prevent renaming to a long filename containing a period.

• Added a warning log message if the CTLoader haxie is installed, as it can cause imports to 
freeze.

219


• Fixed a bug where EagleFiler would always show the introductory help if you had created exclu-
sively encrypted libraries and none were accessible when launching the application.

• Fixed a bug where an AppleScript would hang if you asked it to show the options dialog and then
clicked the Cancel button.

• Fixed a regression where the Batch Change... window sometimes didn’t set the tags properly.

• Worked around changes in Together so that it’s once again possible for EagleFiler to import tags
and notes via the capture key.

• EagleFiler now skips importing InDesign lock files (.idlk), so it no longer complains about them
being missing when InDesign releases the lock.

• Fixed a bug where invalid Spotlight URL metadata from SiteSucker could prevent EagleFiler from
importing a file.

1.5—November 22, 2010
Highlights

• The new Quick entry hotkey lets you create a new RTF or text file from from within any
application. You can enter the contents of the file, choose which library and folder it’s saved
in, and set metadata such as the tags, label, and notes.

• When importing via drag and drop or Save PDF to EagleFiler, you can now hold down the
Option key to have EagleFiler show the options dialog (which was previously only available
when capturing). This lets you set the destination folder, tags, label, notes, etc. There is also
a new EagleFiler: Import (Ask for Options) system service, which presents the options
dialog when importing the selected text or file from another application, and the options
dialog is also available for bookmarklets.

• You can now perform quick tag “searches” by selecting multiple sources (folders, smart folders,
mailboxes, tags) at once (holding down the Command key). Previously, EagleFiler displayed
the union of all the records in the selected sources. Now it displays the union of the records,
but only those that have all of the selected tags. This makes it possible to easily winnow
records by tag without typing a search query. For example, to see the flagged files in a folder,
select the folder and the flagged tag. To see the records that are both flagged and unread,
select both the flagged and unread tags.

• The main window now displays much better previews for iWork documents than what Quick
Look provides. For Keynote, Numbers, and Pages documents that were saved with an embed-
ded preview, EagleFiler can now display full-size previews with multiple pages and highlighted
search result text. This also works for OmniGraffle documents, and it works on Mac OS X

10.4 (where Quick Look is not available).

• Double-clicking a folder or mailbox in the records list now opens it in the same window rather
than making a new window. This should make browsing faster. If you do want a new window,
you can Option-double-click or use the Open in New Window command.

• There’s a new Move To command in the Record menu and the contextual menu, which lets
you quickly move records to a different folder.

• You can now add files directly to EagleFiler’s library folder (or a subfolder) in the Finder.
When EagleFiler scans for new files (which it does when you open the library or use the Scan
for New Files command), it will automatically import any files that it did not previously
know about. You can turn off the ScanForNewFilesOnOpen esoteric preference if you don’t
want EagleFiler to automatically scan when the library is opened.

• EagleFiler can now index and search files that are attached to e-mail messages. This includes
text, RTF, PDF, and Word files, as well as file types that have Spotlight importers.

• Smart folders that search for “contains any/all tags” are about 10 times faster than in Ea-
gleFiler 1.4.

220


• There’s a new Web page format called PDF (Single Page), which creates PDF files that
are optimized for on-screen viewing in a single, continuous page.

• Added the OCR With PDFpen and OCR using UNPDF scripts, which let you perform optical
character recognition on PDF files in EagleFiler. For more information, see the How can I
run optical character recognition (OCR) on my PDFs? section.

• The tags bar can now be used to assign (or remove) tags from multiple selected records at
once. This also works in the Info inspector. (If the records have differing tags, EagleFiler
shows the Batch Change... button, as before.)

• Add the Close & Lock command, which closes an encrypted library and also locks it (by
ejecting the disk image) so that accessing library’s contents requires the passphrase.

Source List

• The Go menu contains new commands to quickly jump to Records (to search the whole
library), the built-in smart folders, flagged, and unread, along with some commands that
were previously in the the View menu.

• You can now use Copy Record Link to create URLs that, when clicked, select particular
folders, smart folders, or tags in the source list.

• Choosing Select All while the source list has focus now selects all the records, which is more
useful than the previous behavior of selecting all the sources.

Records List

• The new Open With submenu lets you view a file or mail message using a particular ap-
plication rather than the default. You can use Always Open With to change the default
application that’s used when you double-click.

• The New Record ▷ From Clipboard command lets you create new files in EagleFiler by
“pasting” (the shortcut is Command-Shift-V) text snippets into the records list.

• You can now drag and drop onto individual folders in the records list. This works for importing
files from other applications, moving records within a library, and copying files from other
EagleFiler libraries.

• You can now three-finger swipe left or right on a multi-touch trackpad or Magic Mouse to go
to the previous or next record in the list.

• There are new columns for Notes, Source URL, flagged, and unread.

• Tooltips now show more information: the kind, size, relative path, source URL, tags, and
notes.

• The icon column now has a title in the hiding/showing menu.


Mail

• The new Merge Message Files command lets you recombine e-mail messages stored as in-
dividual .eml files into a single mailbox file. This lets EagleFiler store the messages more
efficiently and allows for interoperation with other applications that can read mbox files.

• When importing a .eml file, EagleFiler now changes the file’s dates to match those of the
contained e-mail message.

• Apple Mail is pickier than it used to be about which mbox files it will import. When importing
and exporting messages, EagleFiler is now more aggressive about normalizing the message
formats so that Apple Mail will accept them.

• EagleFiler can now import mailboxes that were exported by Apple Mail’s Archive Mailbox...
command. However, it’s still best to capture the messages directly from Mail. The archive
mailboxes use a non-standard mbox format, and EagleFiler cannot read the message status
flags   or MailTags metadata from them.

• When merging mailboxes, the date added is now set to that of the newest mailbox instead of
the current date.

221


• When converting e-mail messages to .eml format, EagleFiler now exports the tags to Open-
Meta.

• If you’ve set Entourage or another mail program as the default opener for .eml files (rather
than Apple Mail), EagleFiler now shows the appropriate application name and icon in the
Record menu when an e-mail message is selected.

• EagleFiler can now import .rssmbox folders from Apple Mail. Capturing RSS messages from
Mail does not work, however, due to limitations of Mail’s AppleScript support.

Viewing and Editing

• You can now open the Quick Look window by pressing the Spacebar or clicking a toolbar
button.

• The new Slideshow command (and toolbar button) opens a full-screen Quick Look view of
the selected record or records.

• Added Replace, Replace All, and Replace and Find commands to the Edit ▷ Find
menu.  The menu commands are probably less convenient than opening the Find panel,
however you can use System Preferences to assign them keyboard shortcuts, to make text
editing much faster.

• Added to the Edit ▷ Spelling and Grammar menu: Check Grammar With Spelling

and Correct Spelling Automatically. EagleFiler remembers these settings per-window.

• Added commands in the Edit ▷ Transformations submenu: Make Upper Case, Make
Lower Case, and Capitalize.

• Added options in the Edit ▷ Substitutions menu: Show Substitutions, Smart Copy/Paste,
Smart Quotes, Smart Dashes, Smart Links, Data Detectors, and Text Replace-
ment. EagleFiler enables these features by default when editing, and it remembers per-
window how you’ve configured them.

• Added the Strikethrough command to the Format menu.

• Improved the quality of the thumbnail images when EagleFiler displays a record in the inline
viewer using Quick Look.

Searching

• Added a Spotlight importer plug-in so that the contents of .eml files (messages that you’ve
dragged out of their mailboxes into folders) can be searched outside of EagleFiler.

• Indexed searches can now find text from additional e-mail header fields such as Bcc and
various sender and mailing list fields. This change takes effect for newly imported mail, or if
you hold down the Command and Option keys when opening a library and tell EagleFiler to
rebuild its indexes.

• Added label text to the smart folder editor that explains how to create new Any/All/None
criteria.

• Note files are now given the associated record’s tags so that they can be searched by tag via
Spotlight.

• EagleFiler is now able to search invisible content in Web archives: link titles, image alt text,
and hidden elements (e.g. spoiler text). Previously imported Web archives will be reindexed
the next time you open the library.

• EagleFiler is much faster at indexing Web archives.

Capture

• When capturing a Web page from Safari, EagleFiler now stores the selected text in a note.

• EagleFiler can now capture from Google Chrome, DEVONthink Pro 2, and Microsoft Outlook
2011.

222


• When capturing from Journler, EagleFiler now preserves the category (as an EagleFiler tag)
and assigns tags to any subsidiary resource files that it imports (rather than just to the main
file).

• EagleFiler now plays the capture sound after running the script, rather than before, so you
can use the sound as an indicator that it’s OK to close your Safari window or NetNewsWire
tab.

• The source items for a capture are now displayed on a separate tab, since they usually didn’t
fit in the single-line text field.

• Improved the error reporting when capturing from Entourage and Firefox 3.6.

• Added the PlayCaptureSound esoteric preference so that it is now possible to make EagleFiler
silent when you press the capture key.

Documentation

• Added the “How can I run AppleScripts from EagleFiler’s script menu?” and How can I run
optical character recognition (OCR) on my PDFs? sections to the manual.

• If you’re launching EagleFiler for the first time or it looks like you don’t have any libraries,
EagleFiler will open the (revised) Basics section of the manual to help you get started.

• Added an About Stationery and Scripts item to the New Record submenu to make it
easy to open the relevant documentation.

• Updated the How can I put my library on my iPhone? and How can I access my library from
multiple Macs? sections of the manual with additional information about Dropbox and other
sharing software.

• Updated the Importing Mail section of the manual with instructions for importing IMAP
mail from Postbox and Thunderbird.

• Added a warning that SugarSync does not support filenames containing : at the Unix level
(/ in the Finder).

• Added commands to the Help menu for displaying the keyboard shortcuts, example Apple-
Scripts, and opening the bookmarklets information page.

AppleScript

• You can now get the viewer’s selected text via AppleScript.

• Added the asking for options argument for the import script command so that you can
show EagleFiler’s options dialog when importing.

• It is now easier to set the source URL when importing via AppleScript.

• Added the basename property for records, which should simplify many common AppleScripts.

• Added the text content property for records, which is useful in circumstances where Ap-
pleScript’s contents doesn’t work.

• You can now initiate a capture or capture with options via AppleScript.

• Changing the source URL of a bookmark via AppleScript now writes the new URL into the
bookmark file.

• Tag abbreviations are now settable.

• Added the load OpenMeta tags command, which lets you write AppleScripts that bring
changed tags from OpenMeta to EagleFiler, rather than the reverse (which EagleFiler does
automatically).

Interface Tweaks

• EagleFiler now shows the spinning progress indicator for all types of activity (not just imports
and merges), and next to the spinner it describes one of the more important things it’s
currently doing. This should make it much easier to see what’s happening without having to
open the Activity window, although you can still do that by clicking the progress indicator.

223


• The notes text view now accepts click-through, so it’s smoother to switch to it and begin
typing.

• You can now Tab (and Shift-Tab) between the source list and the records list without having
to hold the Control key.

• When running on Mac OS X 10.6 or later, EagleFiler now displays file sizes using base-10
megabytes (to match the Finder).

• The default behavior is now to open x-eaglefiler links in an existing window if possible.
You can use the esoteric preferences to make it create a new window instead.

• The Info inspector now shows a proxy icon in its title bar for the file being inspected, and
you can Command-click on it to show a path menu.

• The new Edit Notes menu item (Command-Shift-E) opens the Info inspector and gives the
notes keyboard focus. This makes it easier to quickly add notes to a record.

• When importing a single record, EagleFiler’s Growl notification now shows a thumbnail of
it instead of the EagleFiler icon. This can help you see whether a Web page was imported
correctly or whether it depends on session state that is not available to EagleFiler (requires
Mac OS X 10.5 or later).

• The text view options (e.g. whether Check Spelling While Typing is enabled) are now
synchronized between the viewer and the Notes view in the Info inspector.

• Added the CaseSensitiveTagCompletion esoteric preference, which makes it easier to type
new tag names that are similar to existing tags but with differing case.

• Removed Contents of Record from the default toolbar because most of its functionality is
now available by double-clicking.

• Enabled undo in various text fields (this requires Mac OS X 10.6 due to a bug in previous
OS versions).

• To reduce clutter, the Activity window is now hidden by default. (If you open it via the menu
or by clicking the progress spinner, EagleFiler will remember to re-open it.)

• Moved the Close commands higher in the File menu.

• Improved the design of the Software Update... and Purchase. . . windows.

• Improved the progress icon for metadata backups.

• Updated the disk image layout.

Miscellaneous

• When importing a file that it downloaded itself, EagleFiler has always stored the source URL.
Now it also tries to store the source URLs for files downloaded by other applications.

• EagleFiler is better at displaying and opening alias files.

• Various non-downloadable URLs are now always imported as bookmarks.

• EagleFiler’s metadata backup files now use relative rather than absolute paths. This makes
syncing libraries between multiple Macs more efficient.

• The date added is now restored from metadata backups.

• EagleFiler does a better job of cleaning up the title when importing a file.

• Added ! as an allowed tag character.

• Added ≪ and ≫ as allowed tag name characters.

• Improved EagleFiler’s error reporting when opening search index files.

• Improved EagleFiler’s error reporting when a mailbox file is missing.

• EagleFiler is faster at creating bookmarks from non-Web URLs.

• Made some improvements to the crash reporter.

• EagleFiler can now import plain text notes from metadata backup files that are missing the
RTFD data.

224


Bug Fixes

• EagleFiler now reports an error rather than hanging when you ask it to import an x-eaglefiler

URL.

• Made a change to prevent Zooom/2 from causing an internal error when resizing the source
list.

• Fixed a bug where EagleFiler would sometimes quit when coming out of trial mode.

• Fixed a bug in which EagleFiler would let you try to rename a file using an invalid name.

• Fixed an internal error when formatting file sizes.

• Fixed a bug where setting the title/filename/from/tags from the selection in the viewer didn’t
work if the field in question was currently being edited in the Info inspector.

• Fixed a bug where changing the filename in the Info inspector didn’t update a linked title.

• Fixed a bug where EagleFiler would sometimes report an error when displaying an e-mail
message.

• Fixed a bug with tag auto-completion and non-ASCII characters.

• Fixed a bug where EagleFiler could hang when importing non-Web URLs.

• Worked around a bug in Firefox that could prevent EagleFiler from importing dragged images.

• Fixed a bug where EagleFiler stripped a trailing period from the name when importing a
folder.

• Worked around some OS bugs that caused slowness and prevented EagleFiler from displaying
Web archives created from Safari Reader.

• Fixed a bug where a smart folder that searched for an empty From didn’t work.

• Fixed a bug where PDF files that are unreadable by Preview could not be imported into an
EagleFiler library.

• Worked around an OS bug that could cause crashes when indexing Web archives.

• Fixed scaling when printing PDF files.

• Fixed a bug where choosing Actual Size when viewing a PDF didn’t make the change stick.

• Fixed a bug where EagleFiler would re-save metadata property list files that hadn’t changed,
which could lead to incorrect folder modification dates and sorting.

• Fixed a bug displaying non-Roman Finder label names (requires Mac OS X 10.6 or later).

• Fixed a bug where the scroll position of a .eml file could get reset when switching applications.

• Fixed a bug where certain long filenames would be imported with hexadecimal abbreviations.

1.4.14—January 22, 2010

• Fixed a regression that sometimes caused errors when opening a library window when running on
Mac OS X 10.4 or 10.5.

1.4.13—January 21, 2010

• Improved EagleFiler’s responsiveness with libraries containing many files.

• Updated the instructions for how to make EagleFiler’s capture key work with Preview on Mac
OS X 10.6. EagleFiler will automatically show this when you try to capture from Preview.

• Google Chrome²⁷⁷ does not have sufficient AppleScript support to work with EagleFiler’s capture
key, so EagleFiler will now display a message that tells how you can add an EagleFiler button to
Chrome’s toolbar.

• Added the Convert Plain Text to Rich Text script.

²⁷⁷http://www.google.com/chrome

225


• Added # as a word character for indexing, so that you can search for preprocessor directives and
hashtags. This will take effect for new libraries or if you rebuild your indexes by holding the
Command and Option keys when opening a library.

• Added the Drag and Drop section of the manual and expanded the Importing Mail and The Edit
Menu sections.

• Improved the styling of the Apple Help.

• Fixed a bug searching for certain terms with Match Partial Words enabled.

• Fixed a regression where EagleFiler wouldn’t launch on a PowerPC G3–based Mac.

• Fixed a bug dragging iChat files.

• Fixed a bug where messages didn’t sort properly by Date Created.

• Fixed a bug where some closed windows still showed up via AppleScript.

• Fixed a bug where EagleFiler would crash when processing certain invalid URLs.

• Worked around a bug in Mac OS X 10.6 that could cause inconsistent font sizes in the contextual
menus.

1.4.12—December 8, 2009

• EagleFiler is faster at building a mailbox’s table of contents after importing it.

• You can now use the characters []{}=#. in tag names.

• The Date Created for e-mail messages now shows the date from the message’s headers rather
than the creation date of the mailbox file.

• Added the ViewEMLOnTiger esoteric preference, which is useful for people who want to use Mi-
crosoft Entourage as their external mail viewer on Mac OS X 10.4.

• Tweaked the spacing in the source list to match Mail.

• Tweaked the positions of the tag icons in the source list when it’s set to large icon mode.

• The New Record ▷ Open Stationery Folder command now opens the folder instead of revealing
it.

• EagleFiler is now more robust with respect to errors when importing mail from Entourage, Mail-
smith, and PowerMail.

• Fixed a bug where read records might be tagged as unread when restoring from a metadata
backup.

• Fixed a bug where, in some circumstances, EagleFiler could display an error message or crash
when undoing too many times in the record viewer.

• Fixed a bug where the Tag Cloud didn’t immediately update after changing the font in the
preferences.

• Fixed a bug where Command Up/Down didn’t move the insertion point in a text document when
the viewer had keyboard focus.

• Fixed a bug opening files in MacVim.

• Fixed a bug where EagleFiler didn’t show the alternating row background colors after a failed
search.

• Fixed a bug capturing from Flock²⁷⁸ when using Mac OS X 10.4.

• Fixed a bug capturing large amounts of mail from PowerMail at once.

• Fixed a regression where some icons in sheets were drawn as dimmed.

²⁷⁸http://www.flock.com

226


• Fixed a bug where New Record ▷ Open Stationery Folder and Reveal in Finder didn’t work if
TableText or another old application was running.

1.4.11—November 12, 2009

• The EagleFiler: Import service (for importing the selected text, URL, or files) is now enabled
by default on Mac OS X 10.6. You may still need to log out and log back in for the system to
recognize it, however.

• Worked around a change in Mac OS X that could make EagleFiler report an error when opening
a library.

• Fixed a regression where sometimes EagleFiler didn’t open files in the proper external 
viewer/editor
application.

1.4.10—November 10, 2009

• EagleFiler can now capture from Microsoft Exchange mailboxes in Apple Mail.

• Updated the How can I put my library on my iPhone? section of the manual with a link to the
Dropbox iPhone application.

• You can now double-click an embedded file in the viewer or notes to open it in a separate window
for viewing.

• Improved the instructions for importing mail from Thunderbird.

• The script for quickly creating new text files from LaunchBar will now let you enter tags as 
well.

• If a bug in Mac OS X 10.6 has erased the OpenMeta tags for a file that EagleFiler is importing,
it will now look under kMDItemOMUserTags, which Spotlight may have preserved.

• Deleting a tag now removes it from the shared list of recent tags, so that it doesn’t appear to 
still
be hanging around.

• Worked around a change in Flock²⁷⁹ so that EagleFiler can capture from it again.

• EagleFiler now displays image files according to the orientation information in their metadata
(requires Mac OS X 10.6 or later).

• EagleFiler now writes the tags to kMDItemOMUserTags (and sets kMDItemOMUserTagTime) for
compatibility with newer versions of OpenMeta.

• EagleFiler now gives priority to the org.openmetainfo extended attributes if they’re present and
have more recent timestamps. This will make it possible to transition away from keys in Apple’s
domain.

• Added the RecordsListHasAlternatingBackground esoteric preference for people who prefer a
solid white background color in the records list.

• When you ask it to create a new file, EagleFiler no longer replaces / in the filename with -.

• To avoid confusion with the single-selection case, pressing Return in the records list no longer
opens multiple selected records externally.

• Fixed a bug where the keyboard shortcut for New Record ▷ Plain Text File didn’t work under
non-English localizations.

• Fixed a bug in the URL colorer that prevented some message bodies from being displayed.

• Fixed a bug that could result in empty tag names after renaming.

• Worked around a suspected bug in Mac OS X that could prevent EagleFiler from restoring the
correct window position and size when opening a library.

²⁷⁹http://www.flock.com

227


• Fixed a bug where some individual message files didn’t sort properly by title.

• Fixed a bug with the French localization when creating a new file.

• Changed the way the Software Update... feature finds the downloads folder on Mac OS X 10.5
and later because sometimes the one that Internet Config returned would be invalid or unwanted.

• Improved EagleFiler’s error handling when it can’t read a metadata backup file due to a disk
error.

• Modernized the code.

1.4.9—September 4, 2009

• When using Mac OS X 10.6, you can use the Keyboard pane in System Preferences to add
EagleFiler’s import service to contextual menus in your other applications.

• Added the OpenEagleFilerURLsInNewWindow esoteric preference, which can be used to make
EagleFiler open record links in an existing window rather than creating a new one.

• When dragging from the records list, EagleFiler now makes x-eaglefiler URLs available (instead
of titles) when the receiving application expects plain text. This makes it possible to, e.g. drag
and drop to Things²⁸⁰ to create a link to an EagleFiler record.

• EagleFiler now preserves the flagged state when capturing from Yojimbo.

• Updated the How can I put my library on my iPhone? section of the manual to reference Quick-
word, which allows editing of plain text and Microsoft Word documents from the iPhone.

• Added a note saying that accessing EagleFiler’s Dock menu (e.g. to open a recent library) requires
a right-click or a Control-click under Mac OS X 10.6.

• Added a workaround for an error logging bug in the OS.

• Improved number entry in the smart folder editor.

• Fixed an appearance glitch when dragging from the records list.

• Worked around a bug in Mac OS X 10.6 that could cause EagleFiler to crash when indexing.

• Worked around a bug in Mac OS X 10.6 that could prevent some files from being indexed.

1.4.8—August 24, 2009

• Capturing a bookmark from NetNewsWire, OmniWeb, Safari, and WebKit Nightly is much faster
because EagleFiler no longer goes online to download the contents of the page.

• The records list now supports click-through. This means that it no longer takes two clicks to
select a different record when one of the inspector windows has focus.

• Added an optimization so that image files with custom icons can be displayed in the records list
without having to ask Quick Look to generate a thumbnail.

• Improved the library opening speed by reducing the time spent building the action menu.

• The How can I access my library from multiple Macs? and How can I put my library on my
iPhone? sections of the manual now discuss SugarSync.

• Updated the How can I put my library on my iPhone? section of the manual to add a link to
Apple’s new MobileMe iDisk app.

• The Errors window now appears on all spaces.

• EagleFiler no longer auto-opens the Errors window at launch if it was open at quit.

• The crash reporter works better with pre-release versions of Mac OS X 10.6 (Snow Leopard).

²⁸⁰http://culturedcode.com/things/

228


• The software updater now supports two-digit version numbers like “1.4.10”—just in case.

• Made the progress window wider so that the text fits better.

• Updated the links for Mailsmith’s new home.

• Fixed a bug where EagleFiler’s auto-conversion from an RTF file to RTFD (e.g. when you pasted
in an image) could overwrite a pre-existing RTFD file.

• Fixed a bug where the Reply to Message command didn’t work properly with Entourage.

• Fixed a bug where EagleFiler sometimes didn’t let you type a space in the Capture with options
window.

• Fixed a bug where the fields and text view in the Info inspector would lose keyboard focus when
switching to another application.

• Fixed a bug where editing in the records list wasn’t committed before switching to an inspector.

• Fixed a bug where importing a .webloc file via drag and drop didn’t set the proper source URL.

• Fixed a bug where the record viewer would not remain collapsed when resizing the window.

• Fixed a bug where double-clicking on a column header in the records list would open the selected
records.

• Fixed a bug where, for the first Capture with options for a library, EagleFiler would suggest the
“unread” tag even if the preferences were set not to mark new records as unread.

• Fixed a bug where EagleFiler would report an error when importing an empty message from
Apple Mail.

1.4.7—July 28, 2009

• EagleFiler now copies tags into the extended attributes for Spotlight searchability and interoper-
ability with applications²⁸¹ that use OpenMeta²⁸² (requires Mac OS X 10.5 or later). EagleFiler
also integrates with OpenMeta’s list of recent tags and (since version 1.4.5) imports tags that
were assigned using OpenMeta. As with previous versions, EagleFiler’s primary tag store is its
database, so you won’t lose any metadata if you store, edit, or copy files in a manner that discards
extended attributes, or if you restore from a Time Machine backup. Once a file is in EagleFiler,
the tags must be edited using EagleFiler. The Copy tags to Spotlight comments option still works,
but since OpenMeta support makes it largely redundant it is no longer recommended except for
use on Mac OS X 10.4 and for interoperability with non-OpenMeta applications.

• EagleFiler now displays thumbnail icon previews of image files (requires Mac OS X 10.5 or later).

• Improved EagleFiler’s capture support for Journler²⁸³. It now preserves the tags, comments,
images, and resources, and it omits the entry header.

• Revealing a message in the Finder now reveals a .eml file instead of an .emlx file. You can use

File ▷ Get Info on this file to make Entourage the default message viewer.

• When exporting messages, EagleFiler now adds a .mbox file extension so that Entourage will
recognize that it can import from the file.

• Improved the Web archives that EagleFiler imports from pages served as XML.

• Now shows Growl²⁸⁴ notifications when using drag and drop to copy files from one library to
another.

• EagleFiler now shows a library’s spinning progress indicator for all types of user-initiated 
opera-
tions, not just imports.

²⁸¹http://code.google.com/p/openmeta/wiki/OpenMetaApplications
²⁸²http://openmetainfo.org

²⁸³http://www.journler.com
²⁸⁴http://growl.info

229


• Improved the parsing of invalid e-mail addresses.

• Increased the default capacity of encrypted libraries.

• Fixed a bug where EagleFiler allowed editing of locked files and then didn’t save them properly
(due to a suspected OS bug).

• Fixed a bug where some auxiliary frame content wasn’t saved into Web archives.

• Fixed a bug where tags and notes were not preserved when dragging a bookmark from one library
to another.

• Fixed a bug where Control-Tab didn’t work with Web views.

• Fixed a bug where certain Web pages wouldn’t import from Safari via the bookmarklets.

• Fixed a bug where the search field lost focus after pressing Return/Enter.

• Fixed a bug updating the search field label.

• Fixed a bug where some file URLs wouldn’t import via bookmarklets.

• Fixed a bug creating Web PDFs from non-conforming URLs.

• Fixed a bug importing messages with X-From headers.

• Fixed a bug importing messages from Entourage with Mac linebreaks and unescaped “From ”
lines.

• Fixed a bug indexing notes for libraries inside non-ASCII-named folders.

• Fixed a bug where EagleFiler highlighted search operators in the viewer.

• Removed a Web archive workaround that’s no longer needed due to a bug fix in Safari 4.

• Updated the French localization.

1.4.6—June 1, 2009

• The Drop Pad window now appears on all spaces.

• When creating a Web archive, EagleFiler now uses the proper page title for Web sites such as

gmane.org that change the title using JavaScript.

• Added +$*/~()|%^& as characters allowed in tag names.

• The search fields are now scrollable.

• The ruler is now shown by default for editable rich text files.

• Added keyboard shortcuts for showing, copying, and pasting the ruler.

• Updated to version 1.1.7 of the SkimNotes framework.

• Updated the instructions for changing an encrypted library’s passphrase to work around a bug in
Disk Utility.

• Improved the display of messages containing invalid Base64 content.

• No longer adds a useless x-msg URL to the bottom of text imported from mail messages as RTFD.

• Worked around a bug in the Safari 4 beta that could cause some images not to be saved into Web
archives.

• Fixed a bug where the search wasn’t cleared when opening a folder in a new window with the

ClearSearchWhenChangingSources esoteric preference enabled.

• Fixed a bug where changing the plain text font didn’t change the font of newly typed text.

• Fixed a bug where the raw source for a message would sometimes show one extra character.

• The crash reporter works better with pre-release versions of Mac OS X 10.6 (Snow Leopard).

• The crash reporter now warns before sending a report without an e-mail address.

230


• You can now press Enter to click the Send Report button in the crash reporter.

• Updated Korean localization.

1.4.5—March 24, 2009

• When capturing from Apple Mail, EagleFiler can now directly import messages that are selected
in smart mailboxes and in special “merged” mailboxes such as Inbox.

• When you do a library search for a phrase, EagleFiler now removes the quotation marks when
transferring the query to Preview or Skim.

• EagleFiler now imports tags that are stored in a file’s extended attributes under 
com.apple.metadata:kOMUserTag

by applications such as Tags, TagIt, and Default Folder X.

• Improved compatibility with pre-release versions of Mac OS X 10.6 (Snow Leopard).

• Added the assigned tag names AppleScript property, which can make writing scripts less ver-
bose.

• Added the ExcludeIndexesFromBackup esoteric preference to exclude EagleFiler’s index files from
Time Machine backups.

• Added the FindPanelDiacriticInsensitive esoteric preference.

• Worked around bugs in Microsoft Excel and Word that could cause EagleFiler to import the
wrong document.

• EagleFiler’s temporary files are now excluded from Time Machine backups.

• Worked around a bug in the Safari 4 beta that could make Convert For Editing not preserve
images.

• Worked around a change in Safari 4 that could cause problems when displaying or indexing Web
archives.

• EagleFiler now closes files immediately after you’re done viewing them.

• Fixed a bug where the Errors window did not transform filenames for display.

• Fixed a bug where EagleFiler didn’t show Growl notifications after importing certain files via
AppleScript.

• Fixed a bug where sometimes changes to a text or RTF document were not saved before opening
the file in an external editor.

• Fixed a bug with the date format in mbox files.

• Fixed a bug where EagleFiler did not follow aliases in the Stationery folder.

1.4.4—February 11, 2009

• Streamlined capturing from Apple Mail. EagleFiler no longer asks whether you want to capture
the selected mailboxes or the selected messages; now it always captures the selected messages.
Also made other changes to reduce the number of dialog boxes.

• You can now use Command-Down-Arrow (Reveal in Container) with a message or file selected
to have EagleFiler select it inside its containing mailbox or folder in the source list. This is 
useful
if you had originally selected the message or file in Records, a tag source, or a smart folder and
you want to see it in its original context.

• When you ask EagleFiler to import a file (e.g. by dropping it onto EagleFiler’s Dock icon or
choosing Open With ▷ EagleFiler) that’s already in the current library, EagleFiler now opens
the file for viewing rather than complaining that it’s already in the library.

• EagleFiler now uses non-modal notification windows (Growl, where available) to display the
progress when capturing from a mail program.

231


• EagleFiler now uses its own Find panel everywhere, not relying on the system Find panel, in
order to avoid having two separate windows and to improve the interaction with the search field.

• Added the SendsWholeSearchString esoteric preference, which lets you control whether Eagle-
Filer updates search results as you type.

• When you search for a phrase, EagleFiler now tries to highlight the whole phrase in the viewer,
rather than the constituent words.

• The Find panel works better with Spaces.

• Items in the Services menu can now read the selection from EagleFiler’s records list.

• You can now use the capture key to import New York Times Web pages that are in printer format,
without having EagleFiler download the screen format instead.

• When importing Web pages as RTF(D), EagleFiler now stores the URL in the file’s Subject field.

• When you do a library search for a phrase, EagleFiler removes the quotation marks when trans-
ferring the query to the Find panel.

• When creating PDFs from Web pages, EagleFiler no longer inserts your username into the PDF
metadata.

• When you press the capture key, EagleFiler now bounces its Dock icon once. This makes it easier
to see that the capture has begun if the Dock was hidden or the sound was turned down.

• When creating a new plain text file with the File column hidden, if you enter a filename with an
extension into the sheet, EagleFiler uses that extension instead of .txt.

• When merging mailboxes that are selected in the source list, EagleFiler no longer maintains the
selection when the mailboxes are moved to the trash.

• Deleting multiple errors at once is much faster.

• You can now use Page Setup to change the orientation and scaling when printing.

• When printing a text view, no longer scales down the width unless it’s necessary to fit it on the
page.

• The print job title now shows the title of the document being printed, rather than the name of
the library.

• If a file wasn’t downloaded from the Internet, its source URL is now empty rather than being a

file: URL.

• If there’s an error capturing from Firefox, EagleFiler now suggests uninstalling Default Folder X
to work around a bug in Firefox.

• Tooltips in the Errors window now show the full path rather than just the name of the file.

• Worked around an OS bug that could cause problems when importing text from Apple Mail via
services.

• Better error reporting when EagleFiler encounters an AppleScript bug in NetNewsWire.

• Improved handling of long library names.

• Improved the error reporting when capturing from DEVONthink.

• Fixed a bug where EagleFiler would start importing a file that was copied into the To Import

folder while the copy was still in progress.

• Fixed a bug where indexing could hang if analyzing the file produced a large number of errors.

• Fixed a bug where some Boston Globe Web pages were downloaded as HTML files instead of as
Web archives.

• Fixed a regression that could prevent MailTags from being imported from Apple Mail if the
message also had annotations.

232


• Fixed a bug where files that didn’t have notes could be imported with the note tag if it was in
the Spotlight comments.

• Fixed a bug where the URL wasn’t properly set when importing Web page text as RTFD via
drag and drop.

• Fixed a bug where, when importing IMAP messages from Apple Mail, EagleFiler would sometimes
incorrectly report that attachments were missing.

• Fixed a bug where the tags bar was hidden when it shouldn’t have been.

• Fixed a bug where the scroll arrows for the notes text view didn’t work.

• Fixed a bug handling errors when importing Web archives.

• Tried to work around a URL cache problem that could cause imports to stall.

1.4.3—November 20, 2008

• EagleFiler can now display Skim²⁸⁵ notes attached to PDF files.

• Added an esoteric preference to make EagleFiler import the selected text from a Web view in
RTF(D) format rather than as a Web archive.

• Added an esoteric preference to control whether EagleFiler displays images in HTML e-mails, for
those concerned about Web bugs.

• The color list tab is now available in the color panel.

• In the records list, pressing Return now edits the filename rather than opening the file.

• EagleFiler now preserves filesystem metadata when editing a smart folder’s .plist file.

• PDF annotations are now indexed for searching.

• The metadata backup files are no longer touched unnecessarily, for more efficient backups and
syncs.

• Improved error reporting when emptying the trash.

• Fixed a regression where some files couldn’t be deleted.

• Fixed a bug where tag searches with partial word matching didn’t work with non-lowercase tag
names.

• Fixed a bug where EagleFiler did not report unexpected errors when viewing files.

• Fixed a bug displaying property list files that were not dictionaries.

• Fixed a bug in the German localization for smart folders.

• Fixed a bug where text could be truncated when printing.

• Fixed a bug displaying Web archives created from Mail.

1.4.2—October 30, 2008

• Fixed a regression where the + button in the source list didn’t work.

• Fixed a regression where phrase searches found records that didn’t match.

1.4.1—October 28, 2008

• The Tag Cloud window now supports tagging/untagging multiple records at once.

• You can now setup a stationery file’s Spotlight comments so that new records created from that
stationery have certain tags and/or notes.

²⁸⁵http://skim-app.sourceforge.net

233


• EagleFiler now supports metadata AppleScripts to customize what happens when you create a
new record from stationery. For example, for a journal entry a script could set the From to the
name of the current user and set the filename based on the current date. This is described in the
New Record ▷ Open Stationery Folder section of the manual.

• The Quick Look window now works more like in the Finder. Instead of multiple windows, there’s
now a single window whose content changes depending on what’s selected.

• Added some toolbar shortcuts: Option-click the New RTF button to create a new plain text
file, and Option-click the Tags button to open the Tag Cloud window.

• EagleFiler can now display Scalable Vector Graphics (SVG) images.

• EagleFiler now displays XHTML files as rendered HTML rather than as XML source.

• Faster tag searching in Anywhere searches.

• EagleFiler now understands .url files.

• Made some AppleScript improvements: creation and modification dates are now settable, the
import command now has an option for importing a named stationery file, you can update record
checksums, and you can set the contents of the search field. An example script shows how to
initiate an EagleFiler search from LaunchBar.

• When you click to edit in the File column, EagleFiler no longer selects the file extension. (Pre-
viously, this only worked when pressing Enter.)

• When importing a selection of text via the Services menu, EagleFiler now stores the source URL
if the text was in a WebKit-based view (requires Mac OS X 10.5). Due to a bug in Mac OS X
10.4, dragging and dropping text onto EagleFiler’s Dock icon now requires Mac OS X 10.5.

• For consistency with the Finder, the Label column of the records list now shows “–” instead of
“None” and sorts by name instead of number.

• Now uses “&” as the default prefix when copying tags to the Spotlight comments.

• Improved reporting of unexpected errors.

• Undo now works when the Tag Cloud window is in the front.

• Changed the zooming keyboard shortcuts so as not to conflict with the ones for Universal Access.
(You can still use Command– and Command-+.)

• Fixed spacing of Set Title in contextual menu.

• Added Help button to the Software Update window.

• Removed extra space in contextual menu.

• Fixed a bug trying to open the Find panel when EagleFiler was displaying an image.

• Fixed a bug where some toolbar icons didn’t load if you weren’t running under an administrator
account.

• Fixed a bug where the Find panel didn’t always pick up the query from the search field.

• Fixed a regression where messages in mailboxes could not be opened in Apple Mail when running
on Mac OS X 10.4.

• Fixed a regression where Spotlight comments on files weren’t preserved when importing, if you
had Copy tags to Spotlight comments unchecked.

1.4—October 14, 2008
Highlights

• You can now create custom smart folders, which can contain an unlimited number of criteria,
optionally using nested Any/All/None criteria. Creating and editing smart folders requires
Mac  OS X 10.5; however, once created, the smart folders can be used with Mac OS X 10.4.

234


• Smart folders can now be organized into folders.

• You can define actions to occur when you drag a record onto a smart folder. For example,
you could make a smart folder that shows records with a certain combination of tags, and
that will assign those tags to dragged records.

• You can now create any type of new file from within EagleFiler. To do this, choose New Record

▷ Open Stationery Folder from the File menu. Whichever files you put in the Stationery

folder become available as templates in the File ▷ New Record menu.

• You can now drag messages out of mailboxes to convert them to freestanding .eml files. It’s
less efficient to store messages individually rather than in mailbox files, but there are also
several advantages: the messages can be stored alongside other types of files, they can be
freely moved between folders, and they are searchable by Spotlight.

• Added a Tag Cloud window, which shows a compact listing of all the tags. You can click on
a tag to toggle whether it’s assigned to the selected record.

• Added a Find panel for searching within PDFs and Web archives.

• Added a preference to control which format Web pages are imported in. The supported
formats are: Bookmark, PDF, Plain Text, Rich Text, Rich Text With Images, and Web
Archive (the default).

• Added a preference to control what happens to Spotlight comments when importing. This is
useful, e.g. if you had already used another application to tag your files or if you had entered
notes from the Finder. If you tell EagleFiler to Import as tags, each word is imported as a
tag. If you tell it to Import as notes and tags, EagleFiler extracts tags (prefixed by & or
marked using Punakea’s format) and imports the remaining comments text as notes.

• Added commands to the contextual menus (Assign Tag, Set Filename, Set From, Set
Title) so that you can quickly turn the selected text into metadata.

File Formats

• Added New Record ▷ Plain Text File command.

• EagleFiler can now display Microsoft Word 2007 (.docx) files (requires Mac OS X 10.5).

• EagleFiler can now display and edit OpenDocument Text (.odt) files (requires Mac OS X
10.5).

• EagleFiler can now display and search XML and binary property list (.plist) files.

• Now imports .webloc files as-is rather than converting them to Web archives.

• EagleFiler now imports .eml files as-is rather than converting them to single-message mail-
boxes.

• Bean²⁸⁶ documents are now imported as a separate file type rather than as RTFD.

Interface

• Added Quick Look command, which opens a Quick Look preview of the selected records in a
separate window (requires Mac OS X 10.5).

• Added an Enclosing Record command in the View menu. Replaced the Select Source
command with the similar but more useful Contents of Record command in the View menu.
As   a result, you can now use Command–Up Arrow and Command–Down Arrow to navigate
up and down the hierarchy of folders and mailboxes.

• Added Search for Selection contextual menu command.

• When you mouse over a link in a Web view, EagleFiler now shows the URL at the bottom of
the window.

• Revised the toolbar icons and simplified the default toolbar configuration.

• If there are no matches for a search, EagleFiler draws the records list background in yellow.

²⁸⁶http://www.bean-osx.com

235


• Adjusted the unread and flagged menu item titles and toolbar labels for consistency with
Mail.

• Increased the resolution of the Dock badges.

• The viewer now shows some helpful text describing the “note” tag.

• Moved Show Inspector and Show Tags from the Record menu to the Window menu and
renamed Show Inspector to Show Info.

Capture

• Can now capture from Entourage²⁸⁷, and preserves the message flags, categories, and projects.
If you want EagleFiler to skip a message, you can assign it the category “OmitFromArchive”.

• Can now capture from PowerMail²⁸⁸, and preserves the message status and label.

• Can now capture from Preview²⁸⁹, if you make it scriptable²⁹⁰.

• Can now capture from Together²⁹¹, and preserves the tags, comments, labels, and ratings.

• When capturing from Mailsmith²⁹², EagleFiler can now import individual messages (before,
only mailboxes were supported), and it now preserves the message status, label, and notes.

• When capturing from Camino²⁹³, EagleFiler now reads the URL of the current tab rather
than the first tab.

• In the Capture With Options window, if you edit the tags and then choose a different library,
EagleFiler no longer overwrites the tags with the default ones for the new library.

Importing

• You can now import Web pages using bookmarklets.

• Empty files and files that contain only a resource fork (such as font suitcases) no longer count
as duplicates.

• Added an esoteric preference for importing Spotlight keywords as tags.

• When you try to import a file that’s already inside of the library folder, EagleFiler can now
reveal the file in the browser window.

• If a connection times out while EagleFiler is importing a Web page, it will now retry twice.

• When importing bookmarks from a Web browser, EagleFiler now uses the titles you’ve as-
signed rather than fetching them from the Web.

Miscellaneous

• Encrypted libraries can now be created as sparse bundle images, for more efficient Time
Machine backups (requires Mac OS X 10.5).

• Encrypted libraries can now use 256-bit rather than 128-bit encryption (requires Mac OS X
10.5).

• You can now type tag names directly into an Anywhere search.

• You can now view messages in Microsoft Entourage instead of Apple Mail (requires Mac OS
X 10.5). To do this, Get Info on a .eml file in the Finder, choose Entourage from the Open
with pop-up menu, and click Change All.

• The Copy Record Link command now creates links using persistent IDs so that they will still
work if you delete EagleFiler’s database and import the files into a new library.

• Added How can I put my library on my iPhone? section to the manual.

²⁸⁷http://www.microsoft.com/mac/products/entourage2008/default.mspx
²⁸⁸http://www.ctmdev.com/powermail/
²⁸⁹http://www.apple.com/osx/whats-new/features.html#preview
²⁹⁰http://www.macworld.com/article/53391/2006/10/previewscript.html
²⁹¹http://reinventedsoftware.com/together/
²⁹²http://www.mailsmith.org

²⁹³http://www.caminobrowser.org

236


• Added Shortcuts section to the manual.

• Added an esoteric preference to clear the search field when you select a different source.

• You can now double-click a smart folder to open it in a new window.

• EagleFiler now indexes a file’s Spotlight keywords for searching.

• Improved auto-generated titles.

• Improved the display of improperly encoded message headers.

• Worked around a bug in Mac OS X 10.4 when highlighting matching search terms in the
records list.

• Removes stray index files when opening the library.

• If there’s an error getting the downloads folder for a software update, EagleFiler now defaults
to Downloads rather than Desktop.

• No longer shows the  deleted tag in the records list.

• The Untagged source now shows records that only have the “note” tag.

• Improved parsing of invalid mbox files.

• Improved error reporting when downloading Web pages.

• Rewrote filesystem code to improve performance and error reporting.

• Made various changes to improve interface responsiveness.

• Note files now include a relative URL to the file that they’re attached to, so that you can
easily find the file if EagleFiler isn’t installed.

• Added placeholder text to the Purchase. . . window.

• No longer lets Web pages steal focus from the records list.

• You can now bring up the Find panel when the source list or records list has focus.

• EagleFiler now saves damaged index files for possible future analysis of why Search Kit
couldn’t open them. It also tries multiple times to open indexes, since Search Kit sometimes
changes its mind about which indexes are valid.

Bug Fixes

• If an unexpected error occurs while EagleFiler is emptying the trash, it no longer leaves
the library in an inconsistent state. Also, EagleFiler will now detect and repair this sort of
damage when opening a library.

• Fixed a bug where a duplicate “From ” line could be inserted when generating an mbox file
from an Apple Mail mailbox. This was harmless but unsightly.

• Fixed a bug where, in rare cases, two messages imported from Apple Mail could be joined
into one, so that it looked like some had been skipped.

• Fixed a bug where EagleFiler changed the selection if you tried to delete a source and then
canceled.

• Fixed a bug where Reveal in Finder didn’t work when KeePassX was running.

• Fixed a bug where you could, via the contextual menu, open a different page when viewing
a Web archive.

• Fixed a bug where EagleFiler could freeze when revealing a non-existent file in the Finder.

• Fixed a bug where EagleFiler’s Web fonts would not be consistent with Safari’s if you’d never
changed the fonts in Safari’s preferences.

• Fixed a bug where, when capturing multiple items with notes, some records without notes
would be assigned the notes from one of the other records.

• Fixed a bug where certain errors when creating a new library were not correctly reported.

• Fixed a bug where the PDF viewer state wasn’t always preserved.

• Fixed a bug where the title of text records wasn’t linked to the filename by default.

237


• Fixed a bug where newly added tags weren’t selected if you had been renaming another tag.

• Fixed a bug where EagleFiler could crash when closing a browser window.

1.3.8—July 23, 2008

• Fixed a regression where capturing from Firefox didn’t work.

1.3.7—July 22, 2008

• Fixed a regression where editing a keyboard shortcut could cause EagleFiler to crash.

1.3.6—July 22, 2008

• Opening the Capture With Options window is faster and uses much less memory.

• When capturing a headline from NetNewsWire, EagleFiler now preserves the flagged status.

• Improved the error message when capturing from Firefox²⁹⁴ 3 fails due to a bug in Firefox.

• Fixed some small memory leaks.

• Fixed bug where .eml files converted to mbox format weren’t From-escaped.

• Moved .nib files that don’t need localization out of the English.lproj folder. This should make
it easier to run EagleFiler in a language other than English without changing the default language
on your Mac.

• Fixed bug truncating filenames containing decomposed characters.

• Improved the French localization.

1.3.5—July 2, 2008

• Made various performance optimizations to the browser and activity windows.

• If you click on a mailbox in the source list whose table of contents has not yet been built, 
EagleFiler
now reports this in the viewer so that it’s more clear why no messages are shown yet.

• Dropping between folders in the source list no longer targets the containing folder, since this 
made
the subfolder drop targets too small.

• Improved the way EagleFiler handles special “merged” mailboxes when capturing from Apple
Mail.

• Added EnableWebPlugIns to the esoteric preferences, so that you can prevent Web plug-ins (e.g.
Flash) from loading in EagleFiler’s viewer.

• Capturing a mailbox in Apple Mail no longer captures its submailboxes, unless they’re also se-
lected.

• Fixed bug extracting the metadata from files during import.

• Fixed a bug where, in rare cases, EagleFiler would end up with two internal database records for
the same file. This could happen with Web archives in the To Import folder.

• Fixed the title of the Copy Image command when Control-clicking on an image in the viewer.

• Fixed bug where EagleFiler would clear the display of the selected Web archive when using
Capture With Options.

• Fixed regression where AppleScripting a browser window didn’t work.

• Reduced the delay before showing the Capture With Options window.

• The font-chooser text fields now draw the text centered.

²⁹⁴http://www.mozilla.com/en-US/firefox/

238


• Single-click editing in table and outline views now requires Mac OS X 10.5, since it now relies on
the standard OS functionality.

• In certain circumstances, auto-updating no longer requires authentication.

• Fixed bug where some operations in the Activity window would hang if the OS hung while setting
a Spotlight comment.

• Worked around suspected OS bug, which sometimes caused a file’s creation date to change when
you changed the modification date.

• Fixed bug where the Capture With Options window would be shown even if there were no items
to capture.

• Fixed bug editing filenames with no extension in the records list.

1.3.4—June 3, 2008

• Fixed regression where parts of the Drop Pad didn’t accept dropped files.

• Fixed regression where source list titles sometimes would be truncated prematurely.

• Fixed regression where the top of the viewer was cut off in the German localization.

• Fixed regression where changes to the tags weren’t saved if you closed the window before pressing
Return/Tab or clicking elsewhere.

• The default search scope is now Anywhere.

• The divider in the Info inspector now remembers its position.

• The Tags field in the Info inspector can now be made shorter.

• Improved launching speed.

• Added Importing Mail section to the manual.

• Added FolderMailboxTitleSeparateFromFilename to the esoteric preferences.

• Improved error reporting when capturing from Microsoft Word.

• Fixed bug importing Apple Mail messages when running under certain non-English locales.

• Worked around a framework bug that could cause errors when closing a library.

• Removed logging of invalid URLs.

• Updated the German localization.

1.3.3—May 20, 2008

• Improved the speed of displaying large numbers of files or messages for the first time.

• Can now capture from Opera²⁹⁵.

• Added New Rich Text File command to the Dock menu.

• The Drop Pad is now resizable.

• Worked around Mac OS X bug that prevented EagleFiler from indexing certain documents for
searching.

• The Capture With Options window no longer suggests the title from the previous capture, since
that wasn’t very useful.

• If a mailbox’s messages are not yet ready for display (because EagleFiler is rebuilding the table
of contents), the mailbox name is now shown in gray in the source list.

• Added placeholder text to the tags bar so that it’s more clear that it’s editable.

²⁹⁵http://www.opera.com

239


• Expanded the documentation for the Verify command.

• On Mac OS X 10.4, the viewer pane now shows custom rather than generic icons for files that it
doesn’t know how to display. (On Mac OS X 10.5, it continues to use Quick Look.)

• When searching, EagleFiler now ignores trailing meta characters in the query string, rather than
returning no results.

• The Drop Pad menu command now hides the Drop Pad if it was already visible.

• Reorganized the Dock menu so that the fixed commands are easier to find with the mouse.

• Improved error reporting when capturing from a “merged” mailbox in Mail.

• Adjusted spacing in source list.

• Added “raised” background style to the label in the tags bar.

• Skips importing .git folders.

• Improved error logging.

• Fixed bug where the Tags palette sometimes showed the tags for the wrong library.

• Fixed bug where the Tags field in the Batch Change... window didn’t become checked when you
started typing tags in it.

• Fixed bug with text color of non-highlighted text in selected rows of the records list, when it
didn’t have keyboard focus.

• Fixed error resizing the browser window.

• Fixed importing of Word documents with blank titles.

• Fixed bug where the command in the Window menu said Activity Viewer instead of Activity.
1.3.2—April 24, 2008

• Faster indexed searches when lots of results are found.

• Faster at displaying large text files when running on Mac OS X 10.5.

• The Title and From fields in the Capture With Options window will now try to clean up any
text that you paste in, e.g. removing linebreaks and coalescing multiple spaces into one.

• Enlarged the Title field in the Capture With Options window.

• Some errors now have a tooltip that shows which library they pertain to.

• Preserves more file metadata when editing documents within EagleFiler.

• EagleFiler can now import URLs that contain the | character.

• Adjusted mail-related icons when running on Mac OS X 10.5.

• Added MaxEditableTextFileSizeInMB esoteric preference, which lets you set EagleFiler to only
show the first few megabytes of large text files, so that they display more quickly.

• Disabled undo in the Title and From fields in the Capture With Options window to work around
a bug in Cocoa.

• Fixed bug where the viewer could lose keyboard focus when using Previous/Next Record.

• Fixed bug where mailbox names were not indexed for Anywhere searches.

• Fixed bug editing text or RTF documents that were stored on non-HFS volumes.

• Fixed bug where indeterminate progress bars didn’t animate when running on Mac OS X 10.5.

• Fixed bug importing messages from Apple Mail that claimed to be sent in the year 2038 or later.

• Fixed mbox separator-line dates for imported IMAP messages.

• Fixed regression where files and messages didn’t sort together properly by modification date.

240


• Updated the .sdef file to the latest format.

• Updated to Python 2.5.2.

• Renamed the Activity Viewer window to Activity for consistency with Mail and Safari.

• Fixed color of non-highlighted text in selected rows of the records list.

1.3.1—April 9, 2008

• When searching the Tags scope (or using tag:<name> with another search scope), EagleFiler now
lets you type incomplete tag names if Match Partial Words is checked.

• The @ character is now allowed in tag names.

• When using Capture With Options, any tags or notes that you set are now used in addition to

rather than instead of any tags or notes suggested by the capture script.

• Changes to notes are now undoable.

• Improved responsiveness by limiting the number of simultaneous file copy operations.

• Fixed regression where Copy tags to Spotlight comments didn’t work.

• Fixed regression editing files in the viewer whose path contained non-ASCII characters.

• Fixed regression deleting notes.

• When you delete the selected sources, EagleFiler now selects the next source in the list and
maintains the scroll position.

• Canceling a Capture With Options now brings you back to the application that you were in.

• The tag abbreviation column now sorts by the actual tag names, rather than by the abbreviation
symbols.

• Worked around a Web Kit bug saving certain pages as Web archives.

• Worked around OS bug that could cause a crash when resizing a browser window.

• Tried to work around OS bug revealing files in the Finder.

• After revealing a file in Path Finder²⁹⁶, brings Path Finder to the front.

• Re-positioned Format menu for consistency with Mail.

• Fixed a rare crash when searching a PDF.

• Fixed bug where dragging records in the list sometimes required an extra click.

• Fixed sorting of sources, records, and tags whose names contain combining marks.

• Fixed bug where the contextual menu sometimes had duplicate Highlight commands.

• Fixed bug where sometimes the original title of a document (stored in the file) wasn’t indexed if
you’d set a custom title in EagleFiler.

• Fixed bug where .plist files were sometimes imported as text.

• Fixed bug where a displayed Web archive could auto-open a window in the user’s Web browser.

• Fixed bug remembering the PDF zoom level.

• Updated German localization.

1.3—March 11, 2008

Highlights

• Added Capture with options command (Option-F1 by default), which lets you set the library,
destination folder, tags, and other metadata right when you press the capture key.

²⁹⁶http://www.cocoatech.com

241


• Added Batch Change... menu command and button in the tags bar. This lets you set the
title, from name, label, tags, and notes of the selected records all at once.

• Now uses Quick Look to display file types that EagleFiler doesn’t natively understand (e.g.
Pages, Keynote, OmniGraffle, fonts). This feature requires Mac OS X 10.5.

• Added Untagged smart folder to the source list.

• Added Date Created and Tag Names columns to the records list.

• Added Set Label submenu and contextual menu.

• Added specialized viewing and indexing support for iCalendar (.ics) and vCard (.vcf) files.

• Now indexes Skim²⁹⁷ notes attached to PDF and PDFD files so that you can search for them
within EagleFiler.

• Revised the icons and layout throughout the user interface.

• Made various optimizations so that EagleFiler is faster and more responsive.

Browser Windows

• When creating new rich text files or notes, EagleFiler now creates RTF files instead of RTFD
ones when possible. RTF files are more compatible and faster. Additionally, when editing
files in the viewer, EagleFiler automatically converts between RTF and RTFD depending on
whether RTFD is required.

• When using the Record ▷ Tag command to jump to the tags bar, EagleFiler now moves the
insertion point to the end of the tags, rather than selecting all of them.

• When you create a New Rich Text File within EagleFiler, it’s no longer marked as unread.

• The Open With External Viewer toolbar button now shows which application will be used
to open the file.

• Added Update Checksum toolbar button.

• Now shows tag colors in the source list.

• You can now tab from editing the File column in the records list into the record viewer,
which makes creating new RTF files smoother. (Requires Mac OS X 10.5.)

• When you open a library on a smaller screen than it was previously opened on, EagleFiler
now overrides the OS and shrinks the window so that it fits on the screen.

• Added Select Source to the contextual menu.

• Added a custom drag image for the records lists.

• Added ellipsis-truncation to column headers in the records list.

• Increased the maximum width of the date columns.

• Holding down Option to skip the confirmation when emptying the trash now works from the
contextual menu.

• When displaying Usenet messages from mbox files, EagleFiler now shows the name of the
newsgroup in the To area of the viewer.

• You can now copy an image file that EagleFiler’s displaying to the clipboard.

• Now remembers between launches if you’ve set the PDF view to display continuous or facing
pages.

• You can now press Command-Delete to delete the selected record(s) when the viewer has
focus.

• You can now double-click the drag strip to collapse the source list.

• Increased the font size in the tags bar.

Capture

²⁹⁷http://skim-app.sourceforge.net

242


• If no library is open when you press the capture key, instead of showing an error alert,
EagleFiler now opens the Capture with options dialog, which lets you open or create a
library to complete the capture.

• Can now capture from Address Book, Flock²⁹⁸ 1.0, iCab²⁹⁹ 4, Keynote³⁰⁰, MindManager³⁰¹,
Pages³⁰², OmniGraffle³⁰³, and TextMate³⁰⁴.

• Revised the user interface for setting the capture key.

• While EagleFiler is in the process of capturing (i.e. running the capture script or showing
the capture options dialog), it now badges the Dock icon with a picture of a camera.

• Added |creationDate| and |modificationDate| options for capture scripts.

• Improved preservation of modification and creation dates when capturing from DEVONthink
Pro, MarsEdit³⁰⁵, Journler³⁰⁶, and Yojimbo³⁰⁷.

• Improved the reliability when capturing from WebnoteHappy³⁰⁸, e.g. if it returns invalid tag,
note, or title information.

• EagleFiler now creates the user Capture Scripts folder for you.

Miscellaneous

• If EagleFiler is busy when you ask it to close a library, it now stops any existing operations
(except when doing so would cause data loss), so you no longer have to wait and/or stop
them yourself.

• When dealing with “Bad Checksum” errors in the Errors window, you can now update the
checksums for multiple errors at a time, and after updating a checksum EagleFiler removes
the error from the window.

• Reduced EagleFiler’s RAM use for large libraries.

Importing

• Text dragged from a Web page is now imported as a Web archive instead of an RTFD file.
(If you want an RTFD file, you can use the Convert For Editing command.)

• In addition to checking periodically, EagleFiler now checks the To Import folders when it
becomes the active application. This should get new files imported sooner.

• Now shows a single Growl notification for each batch of files imported, rather than for each
individual one.

• Now shows a progress spinner next to the action menu while EagleFiler is busy importing.

• Changed the Dock icon indicator that shows when EagleFiler is importing. Instead of a red
circle, it now shows a downward pointing arrow.

• Improved EagleFiler’s recovery when WebKit runs into an internal error while saving a Web
archive file.

Info Inspector

• Added URL field.

• Enlarged the Title field and Notes text view.

²⁹⁸http://www.flock.com
²⁹⁹http://www.icab.de
³⁰⁰http://www.apple.com/iwork/keynote/

³⁰¹http://www.mindjet.com/us/products/mindmanager 7 mac/
³⁰²http://www.apple.com/iwork/pages/
³⁰³http://www.omnigroup.com/applications/omnigraffle/
³⁰⁴http://macromates.com/

³⁰⁵http://www.red-sweater.com/marsedit/
³⁰⁶http://www.journler.com
³⁰⁷http://www.barebones.com/products/yojimbo/
³⁰⁸http://www.happyapps.com/webnotehappy/

243


• Now displays three dates—Created, Added, and Modified—and the creation and modification
dates are editable.

• Fields that are unavailable are now disabled rather than just marked as uneditable.

Search

• Now shows the search scope beneath the search box so that it’s clear which parts of the
records you’re searching.

• When searching, you can now use OR as a synonym for |, and you can use -word as a synonym
for !word.

• EagleFiler is better at estimating how long indexing will take when some of the records in
the library are already indexed.

AppleScript

• The import command now returns a list of the imported records. This makes it easier to
set the properties of the new records. Additionally, import now waits until the records have
been imported before returning, so the script knows when the import has finished.

• The import command now supports a deleting afterwards option, which makes EagleFiler
delete the source file after successfully importing it.

• You can now use the import command outside of a tell library document block; it will
then target the frontmost library.

• The source URL property is now settable.

Bug Fixes

• The order in the labels pop-up menu now matches the Finder.

• Now remembers the sorted column of the Tags inspector between launches.

• Fixed bug where the source URL wasn’t set if you imported a URL of a file that wasn’t a
Web page.

• No longer shows the Rebuild dialog when opening a library if you hold down other modifier
keys in addition to Command-Option.

• If EagleFiler was unable to capture due to a bug in the Finder, the error message now suggests
using drag and drop, updating to Mac OS X 10.5, or disabling FileVault.

• Now preserves the creation date when editing files within EagleFiler and when saving notes.

• Fixed bug where the Import Files. . . command didn’t let you import items that were next to
the library folder.

• Fixed bug where certain Apple Mail mailboxes (typically those imported from another mail
program) weren’t imported as mailboxes.

• Fixed bug where the Reveal button in the Errors window didn’t work properly for duplicate
files that came from the To Import folder.

• Fixed bug where the Highlight command didn’t work properly when no text was selected.

• Fixed bug where the Highlight toolbar button in the main browser window would be enabled
when editing a note.

• Fixed bug where EagleFiler would add a uniquing number if you renamed a file/folder to a
name that differed only by case (and you were using a case-insensitive filesystem).

• Worked around a Cocoa bug that could, in rare cases, lead to an infinite loop when saving
the library.

• Fixed bug where some Format ▷ Font menu commands were enabled even though they
couldn’t be used because Allow Editing in Record Viewer was unchecked.

• Fixed bug where toggling Allow Editing In Record Viewer didn’t take effect immediately.

• Fixed crash involving the tags bar.

244


• Fixed bug where capturing just messages from an Apple Mail mailbox with submailboxes
would import empty folders for the submailboxes.

• Fixed bug where newly imported records sometimes didn’t sort properly by modification date.

• Fixed bug where the Info inspector sometimes didn’t show the correct record.

• Fixed bug where custom icons on the To Import folder were not preserved.

• The software updater is better at handling invalid downloads folders.

• Fixed crash involving the Info inspector.

• Fixed bug where Edit ▷ Find ▷ Library Search... didn’t bring the window to the front.

• Fixed bug hiding and showing the source list when running on Mac OS X 10.5.2.

• Fixed bug checksumming packages containing symlinks.

• Fixed bug where JavaScript was disabled in the viewer.

1.2.7—November 14, 2007

• If you create a New Rich Text File while one or more tag sources are selected, EagleFiler now
assigns those tags to it.

• Colored quote levels now work in HTML messages.

• You can now hold down the Option key to empty the trash without a warning.

• Now uses the proper Skim³⁰⁹ icon for PDFD files.

• Combined the three system services into one, which detects whether it was invoke with a file,
text, or URL(s). The keyboard shortcut can now be configured using System Preferences rather
than a separate utility.

• If you make EagleFiler a login item, set it to be hidden, and have it set to open a library when
it’s launched, EagleFiler will now re-hide itself after opening that library.

• Drag-importing from MacJournal works now.

• The system service now works properly when EagleFiler wasn’t already running.

• Control-clicking on a source group no longer selects it.

• Improved scaling of the library document icon.

• Fixed bug where the Apple Help didn’t work on Mac OS X 10.5.

• Fixed regression where assigning/unassigning tags using the Spacebar in the Tags inspector didn’t
always work.

• Fixed bug displaying some encoded message subjects.

• Fixed regression where the top couple pixels of the viewer could be cut off.

• Fixed bug where the icons of some types of sounds, movies, or images showed the wrong file type.

• Fixed bug where the source list sometimes had the wrong background color.

• Fixed ellipsis truncation of selected source names.

• Updated German localization.

• Added Korean localization.

1.2.6—October 24, 2007

• Modernized the source list and buttons.

• Capturing the selected mailboxes/messages from Apple Mail now works when an IMAP path
prefix is set.

³⁰⁹http://skim-app.sourceforge.net

245


• Can now capture from MarsEdit³¹⁰ (based on work by Eric Blair).

• Added support for Skim³¹¹ .pdfd bundles.

• Tags in the tag bar and inspectors now have contextual menus that let you reveal them in the
source list, to see all the records with that tag.

• Added French and German localizations.

• There are new AppleScripts for importing from LaunchBar and Quicksilver.

• You can now modify capture scripts while EagleFiler is open without having to relaunch for it to
notice the changes.

• Improved import speed, particularly when the source volume is slow.

• You can now cancel an import in the middle of EagleFiler checksumming a file.

• Fixed bug where capturing from Apple Mail didn’t work on pre-release versions of Mac OS X 10.5
Leopard.

• Capturing now works with pre-release builds of Camino 1.6.

• Select Source now preserves the selection in the records list after selecting the container 
sources.

• Using the spacebar to toggle tags in the Tags inspector now interacts better with type-selection.

• The search field now expands and contracts based on the available space in the toolbar.

• Convert For Editing now preserves the title and allows duplicates.

• After deleting a record or tag, EagleFiler will now select the next item in the list.

• Clicking a link to open another EagleFiler record now gives it keyboard focus.

• Now clears Web views that aren’t in use, saving memory and silencing sounds.

• Capturing PDF files from Safari now works when the Schubert|it PDF Browser Plugin is installed.

• Renamed the Library source to Records.

• Improved capture script error reporting.

• Metadata files are now invisible by default, and you can prevent them from being created auto-
matically. There are esoteric preferences to control this. Also, EagleFiler avoids writing metadata
files   to disk if they haven’t changed.

• After opening a library with EagleFiler 1.2.6, it will no longer be openable in previous versions 
of
EagleFiler. Of course, the files and metadata are still accessible in the Finder.

• Fixed color of selected tags in inspector.

• Fixed memory leak with the Activity Viewer window.

• Fixed progress bar inaccuracy when importing a folder of files.

• Fixed bug importing .eml files exported from Thunderbird.

• Fixed bug where certain types of sound files were imported as text.

• Fixed bug displaying attachment names that used the Big5 character set.

• Choosing colors is more robust and defaults to the spectrum view.

1.2.5—August 21, 2007

• Can now capture from Cyndicate³¹².

• Fix bug where Flash was disabled in Web views.

³¹⁰http://www.red-sweater.com/marsedit/
³¹¹http://skim-app.sourceforge.net
³¹²http://cynicalpeak.com/cyndicate/

246


• Fixed bug where the insertion point would sometimes move if you edited in the record viewer and
then manipulated the window before it had saved.

• Improved the robustness of the startup code to prevent some rare problems when launching
EagleFiler.

• Improved handling of FDF files.

• Fixed rare errors importing lots of files at once.

• Verifying checksums is faster.

1.2.4—August 2, 2007

• The records list uses gentler background colors to indicate the files’ labels.

• Now shows labels in the source list.

• Added keyboard shortcuts for going to the next or previous PDF page.

• Now shows tooltips in the source list.

• The records list now has an alternating background color, like the Leopard Finder.

• Improved the responsiveness of the user interface when highlighting search matches in PDFs.

• Fixed incorrect outline/table row heights when using certain fonts.

• Now preserves extended attributes when copying files into the library.

• When using Copy Record Link and pasting into a rich text view, the pasted text’s font will now
match that of the surrounding text.

• Improved the Next/Previous toolbar buttons.

• Dragging from EagleFiler to a burn folder now creates a link instead of copying the file.

• If the File column is hidden, both Enter and Option-Enter will bring the Title column into edit
mode.

• After you drop a file onto a spring-loaded folder in the source list, EagleFiler will collapse the
temporarily expanded folders.

• EagleFiler no longer tries to import SketchUp files as text, and therefore it won’t try to display
them, which led to long freezes as the data overloaded Cocoa’s text system.

• Improved capture error messages.

• Fixed bug parsing tags from strings containing non-ASCII alphabetic characters.

• Fixed bug where labels were lost when editing RTF or RTFD files within EagleFiler.

• Now preserves modification dates when capturing from Yojimbo.

• If the records list is empty because nothing matched the search, this is now reported in the 
viewer
so that you don’t wonder why the list is empty.

• If Allow Editing in Record Viewer is off, New Rich Text File will now always bring down a
sheet for setting the text of the new file.

• Choosing Edit ▷ Find ▷ Library Search... now works when the toolbar is in Text Only mode.

• Fixed help book icon.

1.2.3—July 2, 2007

• Calculates folder sizes and shows them in the records list.

• Added import plain text AppleScript command for when you want to import a string as a text
file rather than an RTF one.

247


• When you view a file, EagleFiler now makes sure that it’s up-to-date in the index, in case you
modified it outside of EagleFiler.

• When you edit a filename in the records list, EagleFiler no longer pre-selects the extension.

• The Errors window no longer auto-selects errors when they are added.

• Added progress bars when creating or opening a library.

• Rotates the log file to prevent it from growing too large.

• Changed the verification icon.

• Improved error handling when creating or opening a library.

• Fixed bug where folder labels weren’t preserved when importing.

• Worked around OS bug that caused an internal error when pressing Option-Tab in an empty text
view.

• Errors reported from EagleFiler’s lower level frameworks are now reported in the log file rather
than on the system console.

• Fixed bug where EagleFiler would let you import the library into itself.

• Fixed regression where canceling an import sometimes didn’t work.

• Worked around suspected QuickTime bug that caused EagleFiler to not import the proper ID3
tags from some MP3 files.

• Improved reporting of duplicate file errors.

• No longer tries to import .localized files.

• Fixed bug handling locked files and folders.

• Fixed bug where an error could be reported if you emptied the trash when a record in it was
selected.

• No longer tries to backup the metadata for missing folders.

• Fixed bug displaying e-mail messages when the chosen font was no longer available.

1.2.2—June 20, 2007

• Fixed bug where some menu commands were disabled when the record viewer had focus.

• When you view a PDF file, EagleFiler will now update the page count in the records list in case
it has changed.

• Fixed bug where PDF page counts weren’t transferred when dragging from one library to another.

• Fixed bug importing text via drag and drop.

• Fixed PyObjC bugs that could cause various crashes and hangs.

• Fixed regression where Open in Delicious didn’t work.

• Fixed icon scaling in Activity viewer when merging mailboxes.

• Fixed regression where where changing Allow Editing in Record Viewer didn’t take effect imme-
diately.

• Fixed bug where EagleFiler would re-open at launch even libraries that were in the trash.

• Worked around Cocoa bug that could cause the record viewer’s scroll bars to be hidden if you
expanded the viewer when the ruler was hidden.

• Fixed bug where EagleFiler tried to import invisible metadata files.

• Fixed bug where the copy cursor was shown when dragging and dropping within the record viewer.

• Fixed bug where the spell-checking state wasn’t remembered.

248


• Fixed bug with the PDF zoom-to-fit state and the contextual menu.

• Worked around PDF Kit bug where the password field wouldn’t disappear.

• Fixed bug with To Import folders and locked files.

• Fixed bug where EagleFiler let you create a new library on top of an old one.

• Fixed bug indexing certain HTML and Microsoft Word files.

• Fixed bug with multiple backup metadata operations at once.

1.2.1—June 8, 2007

• You can now use the Export... command to export the selected messages in mbox format, so that
they can be imported into any mail program.

• The names of To Import folders now include the library name, so that you can tell them apart
in a Finder or open panel sidebar.

• Can now capture from Pukka³¹³ and WebKit Nightly³¹⁴. When capturing from Yojimbo³¹⁵,
now preserves the label as an EagleFiler tag. When capturing from Cocoalicious³¹⁶, Journler³¹⁷,
Yojimbo³¹⁸, and WebnoteHappy³¹⁹ now preserves the title rather than extracting it from the file.

• The label colors now more closely match those in the Finder, and the pop-up menu sorts alpha-
betically.

• The tooltip for the Tags column in the records list now shows the names of all the assigned tags.

• Allow duplicate files in library is now a full preference.

• When copying tags to Spotlight comments, EagleFiler now separates the tag names with a space
instead of a comma-space, and there is an esoteric preference to set a tag prefix such as &.

• When copying files into the library, now copies the Spotlight comments, too.

• Added tooltips to help with setting tag abbreviations in the inspector.

• The Backup Metadata command can now be used to force EagleFiler to copy the tags to the
Spotlight comments, if you don’t want to wait for this to happen automatically.

• Added esoteric preference to make EagleFiler display Web pages using their print stylesheets.

• When writing a capture script, if you obtain the tag names as a single string, you can pass it as

|tagsString| to let EagleFiler parse it into individual tag names.

• You can now select more than one error at a time in the Errors window.

• Adjusted the word characters used for indexing to make it easier to find words containing $, @,

%, and . (This will only take effect after rebuilding the indexes.)

• Made some changes to the New Library. . . interface to make it more clear that the maximum
library size only applies to encrypted libraries.

• Fixed regression where EagleFiler couldn’t open libraries inside folders with non-ASCII names.

• Fixed regression where the Info inspector sometimes displayed information for the wrong 
record(s).

• Fixed bug where .webloc files in the To Import folder were not deleted after importing.

• If EagleFiler encounters an error while importing a file in a To Import folder, it now moves the
file to the Unable to Import folder so that it won’t encounter the same error again the next time
it scans the To Import folder.

³¹³http://codesorcery.net/pukka
³¹⁴http://nightly.webkit.org
³¹⁵http://www.barebones.com/products/yojimbo/
³¹⁶http://www.scifihifi.com/cocoalicious/
³¹⁷http://www.journler.com
³¹⁸http://www.barebones.com/products/yojimbo/
³¹⁹http://www.happyapps.com/webnotehappy/

249


• Fixed bug importing WMA URLs.

• Worked around crash due to bug in Search Kit.

• Fixed bug where the records list lost focus when a search was active and you clicked on a Web
archive.

• Fixed bug with the foreground color of highlighted text in the records list.

• Fixed bug where EagleFiler would be slow and could run into an OS error when capturing a large
number of documents at once.

• Made various error reporting improvements.

• Improved undo in the inspectors.

• Fixed cosmetic bug with the Reveal In Library button.

• Fixed interface glitch where it looked as though EagleFiler would let you move the trash and
smart folders around.

• EagleFiler will no longer crash when opening a library on pre-release versions of Mac OS X 10.5.

1.2—May 30, 2007

• Made a variety of changes to improve EagleFiler’s speed and responsiveness, especially for 
libraries
with many files.

• You can now copy from one library to another via drag and drop. All of the EagleFiler metadata
will be preserved.

• The New Library. . . command now offers the option to create an encrypted library.

• Highlights search matches in the items list and the record viewer.

• Each library now has a To Import folder in the Finder. Any files that you save into this folder
will be imported when you open the library (or within the next minute or two if the library is
already open).

• You can now delete (and undelete) individual e-mail messages.

• Uses the available Spotlight importers to index the content of many types of files that EagleFiler
doesn’t natively understand.

• Added Match Partial Words option to the search pop-up. When this is checked, you can search
for partial words without having to type wildcards (*) in the query.

• tag:<tagname> searches now work with Filename, From, To/Cc, and Title searches, rather than
just Anywhere and Notes searches.

• Can now capture from Skim³²⁰ and Journler³²¹ (preserving tags).

• When capturing from Cocoalicious³²², EagleFiler now preserves the tags and the description and
extended description.

• Added Backup Metadata command. EagleFiler will automatically backup a library’s metadata
when it’s opened (unless you have Shift held down) and also periodically after it’s been opened.
You can manually backup the metadata by holding down the Option key and choosing Backup
Metadata from the File menu. Metadata is backed up to EagleFiler Metadata.plist files
inside  the library folder. If you import a file that has backed-up metadata, EagleFiler will use 
the
stored metadata to set the title, from name, checksum, source URL, tags, and notes.

• Added Copy tags to Spotlight comments preference. When this is enabled, you’ll be able to find
files in your library by searching for their tag name using Spotlight.

³²⁰http://skim-app.sourceforge.net
³²¹http://www.journler.com
³²²http://www.scifihifi.com/cocoalicious/

250


• If you hold down the Command and Option keys when opening a library, you can access the new
Rebuild Indexes dialog. This lets you optimize or repair EagleFiler’s search indexes, and you
can choose whether it indexes for word searches or phrase searches. Previous versions of EagleFiler
always indexed for phrase searches. Switching to word indexing will speed up EagleFiler’s indexing
and substantially reduce the amount of disk space that the indexes consume.

• Added Update Checksum command, so that it’s easier to tell EagleFiler when you’ve modified a
file using another application.

• When importing via AppleScript, you can now specify which folder to import into, e.g. import
files {theFile} container theFolder.

• It’s now possible to change filenames via AppleScript.

• When using Previous/Next Record with the Info inspector in front or the tags bar focused, the
text field will retain its focus as the selected record changes, making it possible to quickly edit
multiple tags/titles/filenames in sequence.

• You can now press Option-Delete when viewing a tag source to move the selected records to the
trash rather than unassigning the tag.

• Added Esoteric Preferences.

• When exporting messages in .emlx format, now includes the tags and notes.

• Now shows a determinant progress bar when importing a folder.

• No longer shows a progress window when opening a library.

• Improved the display of various kinds of multi-part e-mail messages.

• No longer shows the children of smart folders in the source list.

• Now shows the pointing hand cursor when you hover over a clickable link in a text view.

• From the AppleScript interface, it is now possible to access records by name, subject to the
filename being unique.

• Added backup metadata AppleScript command.

• You can now change the case of a file’s extension.

• Updated to Python 2.5.1.

• Worked around OS bug that could cause crash when viewing PDFs.

• Fixed bug where the note tag could get out of sync.

• Fixed bug where creating a link when editing in a rich text view would sometimes insert the link
after the selected text.

• Fixed crash when indexing certain QuickTime files.

• Fixed bug calculating checksums of certain document packages.

• Fixed memory leak with Activity Viewer window.

• Worked around Search Kit bug that could cause a crash when doing a phrase search.

• Fixed bug where if you drag-imported multiple folders into a folder, the second and subsequent
folders would be imported at the top level.

• Fixed bug capturing from Yojimbo 1.4.2.

• Fixed bug where the URL colorer didn’t find certain valid URLs.

• Fixed bug where EagleFiler allowed duplicate files to be added to the library.

• Fixed threading bugs when importing multiple files at once.

• When viewing a Web page, if you click on a link to another part of the same page, EagleFiler
now scrolls the window rather than opening the location in a new window.

251


• Modernized the crash reporter code.

• Fixed bug where EagleFiler would sometimes keep files open after a library had been closed.

• Fixed bug where the Info inspector showed “()” for the size of a folder.

• Fixed bug in reporting library save errors.

• Fixed bug where application-level menu commands could get permanently disabled.

1.1.6—March 5, 2007

• Now supports searching by filename.

• Can now capture from Flock³²³.

• The interface is a bit more responsive, due to threading improvements when importing, indexing,
and merging.

• No longer hangs when indexing a movie with unresolved file references.

• No longer uses any CPU time when idle.

• Can now import malformed mbox files generated by MailSteward.

• Fixed bug where fields in the inspector could lose their focus when a background operation
completed.

• Fixed bug dropping onto an item inside the Trash source.

• Fixed regression displaying contents of multiple folder sources.

• Fixed regression where new rich text records weren’t auto-selected.

• Improved error handing during menu/toolbar validation.

1.1.5—February 20, 2007

• Worked around a Cocoa bug that could cause a crash when closing a window or open/save panel.

• The Date column is now called Date Modified.

• Fixed bug where a record’s cached modified date could get stale.

• Fixed bug where closing a window or pulling down the File menu could be slow if there were
messages selected.

• Fixed regression where the same mailbox could be indexed by duplicate threads.

• Fixed bug remembering the open libraries when quitting.

• Fixed display of library names containing slashes.

1.1.4—February 16, 2007

• Added Show ▷ Messages in Records Source option.  This makes it possible to view and search
everything in the library by selecting the Records source. Previously, to search e-mail messages
you   had to select one or more mailboxes; you can still do that, if you want to restrict the search
to just those mailboxes.

• The Tags inspector now sorts the assigned tags to the top.

• Added Bigger/Smaller commands for adjusting the text size for rich text documents and Web
archives.

• You can now omit the Shift key when pressing the keyboard shortcut to zoom in, i.e. Command-=
is now equivalent to Command-+.

• Improved URL coloring in messages.

³²³http://www.flock.com

252


• Made various performance improvements, particularly to file indexing, display in the browser
window, and emptying the trash.

• Now shows custom file icons (rather than a generic text icon) for files such as OmniGraffle docu-
ments that are in XML format but are not strictly text documents.

• Added New Folder button to the Export... dialog.

• The Import Files. . . and Export... dialogs are now sheets.

• Worked around Search Kit bug that caused crashes when doing phrase searches.

• Worked around suspected Cocoa bug that could cause a crash if you pressed Cancel when creating
or opening a library.

• Worked around Cocoa bug that could cause the source list not to properly scroll to show a new
tag that had been created.

• Fixed bug importing MailTags projects.

• Fixed bug where the tags field in the Info inspector didn’t wrap when there were a lot of tags, or
update when the record selection changed.

• Fixed bug where insertion point didn’t advance when pressing Space while editing a tag’s name
in the Tags inspector.

• Fixed bug accessing tags via AppleScript.

• Fixed bug displaying Web archives.

• Fixed problem displaying messages in tag sources if an index file had been damaged.

• Improved compatibility with pre-release versions of Mac OS X 10.5.

• The Software Update auto-updater is now compatible with FileVault.

• No longer shows inaccurate size for folders.

• Made various improvements to the error reporting and error logging.

1.1.3—January 25, 2007

• Can now capture from DEVONagent³²⁴, DEVONthink Pro (preserving comments), Nisus Writer
Express³²⁵, and Yojimbo³²⁶ (preserving comments and tags).

• Added Copy Source URL to the contextual menu.

• Better display of e-mail messages with embedded messages (such as digests and bounced mes-
sages).

• You can now use just plain Tab instead of Control-Tab to tab out of the viewer pane in the
browser window when the viewer is a read-only text view.

• In the records list, you can now type Option-Enter to edit the title of the selected record.

• If a message attachment doesn’t have a name, EagleFiler will list the content subtype next to the
paperclip instead of omitting that attachment.

• When capturing from Apple Mail with both messages and mailboxes selected, “Mailboxes” is now
the default choice.

• Better error messages when you try to capture a smart mailbox in Apple Mail.

• EagleFiler cannot import mailboxes from Apple Mail on Mac OS X 10.3 and earlier. Rather than
importing the mailboxes as folders, it now reports an error.

³²⁴http://www.devon-technologies.com/products/devonagent/index.html
³²⁵http://www.nisus.com/Express/
³²⁶http://www.barebones.com/products/yojimbo/

253


• Can now import more types of text clippings.

• Spaces in tag names are now converted to underscores instead of being deleted.

• Fixed error when pressing Enter in the records list.

• Fixed bug where capturing packages from the Finder didn’t work.

• Fixed bug where the scroll position and selection in the notes editor would be messed up when
switching to another application.

• Worked around a Web Kit bug that caused it to needlessly fetch archived portions of a Web page
over the network, or not display them at all if you were offline.

• Worked around a Web Kit bug when displaying a Web archive created from a local HTML file.

• Fixed bug where Reveal In Library sometimes looked in the wrong library.

• Fixed error undoing in the tags fields.

• Fixed error using the Highlight command with no selection.

• EagleFiler’s helper tools don’t use the URL cache, so now they tell Web Kit not to store one.

1.1.2—January 9, 2007

• Tabbing between the source list, records list, and viewer works much better, as EagleFiler now
overrides the Cocoa keyboard loop.

• You can now press Enter in the records list to edit the filename or press Return to open the
selected records.

• Can now capture from PDFView³²⁷.

• AppleScript enhancements:

– Added import text command, which takes a string and creates a new rich text file in the
library.

– You can now access the open browser windows along with their displayed records and

selected records.

– Added note file and trashed properties to library record. Also, various formerly read-
only library record properties are now writable.

– Added container property to tag.

• If you click the + button in the browser window with the Tags folder or a tag selected, EagleFiler
will create a new tag instead of a new folder.

• EagleFiler is more responsive when emptying the trash, as the lengthy index updating now takes
place in a background thread. Also, EagleFiler now compacts the search index when emptying
the trash, which should reduce the disk space used and speed up future searches.

• Added a hidden preference to make EagleFiler not check for duplicate files during importing.
Click the link to allow duplicate files³²⁸ or to forbid them³²⁹.

• Worked around PDF kit bug that could cause repeated zooming out when viewing a PDF.

• Fixed bug where EagleFiler didn’t recognize document packages when importing a folder full of
files.

• Fixed regression where EagleFiler could freeze when clicking an X button in the Activity Viewer.

• If the library changes while you’re in the middle of editing a table cell or text field, 
EagleFiler
will no longer replace your in-progress changes with the value from the database, nor will it mess
up the insertion point.

³²⁷http://pdfview.sourceforge.net

³²⁸x-eaglefiler://default?k=AllowDuplicateFiles&v=YES
³²⁹x-eaglefiler://default?k=AllowDuplicateFiles&v=NO

254


• When following an EagleFiler link, if the specified library can’t be found, but one with the same
name is already open, EagleFiler will try to use that library to open the link.

• Made various changes to improve the responsiveness of the interface.

• Faster file deletions, with better threading, should improve the performance of all background
operations that create temporary files.

• Fixed crash when logging indexing errors.

• Worked around some framework bugs that could cause a variety of different crashes.

• The indexer recovers better when a file is unexpectedly deleted.

• Worked around Cocoa bug that could cause some tags to be removed if you ended editing in a
tags field by pressing Return when the insertion point wasn’t at the end of the field.

• Fixed regression where changes to the tags weren’t saved when closing the Info inspector.

• Text filenames are now allowed to have no text before the extension, so you can now store and
rename “dotfiles” in EagleFiler.

• It is now possible to edit the extensions of text files.

• If you launch EagleFiler by dropping a file onto it, it will now open the default library before
importing the file rather than complaining that no library is open.

• Added blank line before the source URL in the records list tooltip.

• No longer brings the Errors window to the front (which was undesirable if you were in the middle
of typing something) when an error occurs—instead, it just makes sure the window is visible.

• The mailbox importer now handles messages that start with “>From ” instead of a header.

• Better handling of encrypted PDFs.

• Better error reporting in Endo capture script.

• Better error message when can’t capture from Mail.

• Fixed bug logging errors during mailbox rebuild jobs.

• Fixed bug where browser windows didn’t remember whether the trash source was expanded be-
tween launches.

• Fixed bug where Command-Right Arrow and Command-Left Arrow didn’t work in text views.

• Fixed bug where Reveal In Library didn’t work for records that were in the trash.

• Simplified the Purchase window.

1.1.1—December 18, 2006

• When capturing a selection of files from the Finder, Spotlight comments may now be imported
as tags or notes.

• Can now capture from Microsoft Excel.

• The keyboard shortcut for Import Text is now Command-% instead of Command-<, as the latter
conflicted with a system-wide shortcut when using certain keyboard layouts.

• When creating a rich text record using text dragged from Safari (or, generally, any WebView),
EagleFiler will now set the source URL and add it to the bottom of the text.

• You can now create records by dragging text selections from within EagleFiler to its source list
or records list.

• After you choose Convert For Editing, EagleFiler will now select the newly created RTFD files
rather than leaving the original Web archives selected.

255


• When pasting the results of Copy Source URL into a rich text view, the clickable text is now the
URL itself, rather than the title, and no trailing newline is added.

• Added source URL to tooltip in records list.

• Generates better titles from dragged text.

• If you change the PDF view away from Zoom To Fit, it now remembers the current scale factor.

• Improved the speed of the initial index check when opening the library.

• Improved parsing of mbox files.

• Fixed bug where capturing some URLs didn’t work.

• Fixed bug where, when opening a new window to display a record, the record wasn’t always
selected.

• Fixed bug where EagleFiler could hang if you tried to edit the title or filename of a record while
it was doing something else.

• Fixed regression where importing via drag and drop from another application sometimes didn’t
work.

• Fixed bug and reduced RAM usage when importing a large number of files/folders at once.

• Fixed bug where the source list or records list would go into edit mode when you clicked on it
and it didn’t already have focus.

• Fixed bug where a PDF or Web archive would needlessly be scrolled to the first page.

• Stopping indexing operations by clicking the X button works better now.

• Indexing no longer hangs if there’s a problem loading a Web archive or if it’s corrupt.

• Worked around OS bug that prevented some Word documents from being indexed.

• Fixed bug reporting errors while adding a file to the library.

• Better error reporting for damaged Web archive files.

• Fixed bug where tag sources showed messages for mailboxes that were in the trash.

• Fixed bug where child tags weren’t sorted in the source list.

• EagleFiler no longer lets you give a tag an empty name.

• Worked around issue when saving libraries on Leopard.

• Worked around OS issue that caused EagleFiler to be the default opener for Word files.

• Worked around some bugs in libraries that EagleFiler uses, which caused errors when importing
text via drag and drop.

• Better error reporting when can’t write a temporary file or save the library.

• The contextual menu now says Delete instead of Move To Trash, since deleting from a tag source
doesn’t move to the trash.

1.1—December 6, 2006
Importing

• EagleFiler will now let you import any kind of document. If it doesn’t know how to display
the document, it will simply show the file’s icon, which you can click to open it in another
application.

• When importing via drag and drop, you can now drop onto folders or tags in the source list
or into the records list in order to put the imported records into that folder or assign them
that tag.

• Now recognizes many more kinds of text files and text clippings.

256


• Can now import individual messages from Entourage via drag and drop.

• Added Command-< keyboard shortcut for the Import Text service.

• You can now import by control-clicking on a file in the Finder and choosing Open With ▷ Ea-
gleFiler.

• Added Import Clipboard command to the Dock menu.

• It is now possible to specify tag names and note text when importing via AppleScript.

Capture

• Can now capture IMAP mailboxes and individual selected messages from Apple Mail.

• Can now capture from Endo³³⁰, Firefox³³¹, and WebnoteHappy³³².

• If you press the capture key when there is no library open or while in an unsupported ap-
plication, EagleFiler will now try to help you open a library or import the data in another
way.

• Capture scripts can now import tags and notes.

Text and Rich Text Files

• It’s now possible to edit text, RTF, and RTFD files directly in the record viewer. EagleFiler
will automatically save any changes that you make and update the files’ checksums.

• Creating new rich text files is much smoother. The keyboard shortcut is now Command-N
instead of Command-Control-N. If the File column is visible, EagleFiler will bypass the sheet,
select the new file in the records list, and bring the File cell into edit mode so that you can set
the filename and title. You can then tab into the record viewer to begin typing the contents
of the file.

• You can drag records into the record viewer (or the notes text view) to create links to them.

Searching

• You can now search by tag. You can also add tag criteria when doing an Anywhere or Notes
search (e.g. tag:apple steve).

• Now remembers the last-used search scope (globally and per-window).

• You can now access the search syntax help page from the toolbar search field menu.

Tags

• Added auto-completion when typing tag names.

• Added tags field to the bottom of the browser window, so that you can edit the tags of the
selected record without having to open another window. You can quickly give the tags field
keyboard focus by pressing Command-Shift-T.

• Tag sources now show all the e-mails with that tag (rather than just the files).

• Tag sources now behave more like iTunes playlists and iPhoto albums. If you delete a record
from a tag source, EagleFiler unassigns the tag, but the record remains in the library.

• You can now arrange tags into a hierarchy in the source list, to organize them or to hide the
ones you don’t want to see at the moment.

• Added New Tag menu command. If records are selected it changes to New Tag From
Selection and the selected records are assigned the new tag.

Browser Windows

• You can now single-click to edit the Title, From, or File directly, instead of having to open
the Inspector window.

³³⁰http://kula.jp/software/endo/
³³¹http://www.mozilla.com/en-US/firefox/
³³²http://www.happyapps.com/webnotehappy/

257


• Added Convert For Editing command, which lets you convert Web archives to RTFD files
that can be edited.

• If you hold down Option when double-clicking a Web archive (or a RTFD file converted from
a Web archive), EagleFiler opens the current version of the page rather than the archive.

• EagleFiler now shows custom icons for folders. You can set a custom icon using the Finder’s
Get Info window.

• Added Show ▷ Source List and Show ▷ Record Viewer commands for people who want to use
the menu or keyboard instead of double-clicking the divider.

• Added Actual Size and Zoom to Fit commands. The PDF viewer now remembers its
zoom state, so that it won’t keep resetting to Zoom to Fit if you’ve zoomed in.

• Remembers the selected sources between launches.

• Arrow-keying through the records list is faster now.

Libraries

• Added Remember open libraries between launches preference and Startup Items folder.

• The Drop Pad now has commands for creating a new library, opening a library, and opening
recent libraries.

• The Dock menu now shows recent libraries.

Other Enhancements

• If you ask EagleFiler to import a URL and the URL can’t be saved as a Web archive (e.g.
because it’s an image or PDF), EagleFiler will download the file and import it as-is, rather
than reporting an error about not being able to save a Web archive.

• Now imports MailTags projects as tags.

• The Zoom In and Zoom Out commands now work with Web archives, where they change
the font size.

• The Copy URL command is now called Copy Record Link.

• Added Highlight command, which changes the background of the selected text to yellow.

• Added Outline and Styles. . . to the Format menu.

• Dragging a library file onto the Drop Pad now opens the library rather than complaining that
the library can’t be imported.

• Improved the way EagleFiler auto-generates file names when creating a file from dragged text
or a Web page’s title.

• Now skips importing Apple Mail messages that are marked as deleted.

• Capture scripts are now allowed to use the compiled script format, with the .scpt extension.

• Folders and mailboxes no longer have a title attribute that’s separate from the file name.

• When creating a new rich text file inside a sub-folder, it’s now revealed there instead of in
the Records source.

• Indexing is now somewhat faster and uses less memory.

• Double-clicking a folder now opens it in EagleFiler instead of in the Finder.

• In the source list, single-clicking now enters edit mode and double-clicking now opens the
source.

• Improved secondary sorting of records list.

• Increased maximum width of the Kind column.

• Added keyboard shortcuts for Select Source and Hide Others.

• Rich text copied using Copy Record Link now includes the title of the record, rather than
just the URL.

• Now displays the proper background color for RTF documents.

258


• Added Open Source URL, Copy Record Link, and Verify to the contextual menu.

• The underscore and hyphen characters are now allowed in tag names.

• You can now drag into the records list of a tag source to assign that tag.

• Shortened toolbar button labels.

• The menu commands for Show Inspector and Show Tags now toggle the visibility of the
windows rather than showing them.

• The Software Update... checker now works behind an HTTP proxy.

• The Import Files menu command no longer allows you to import individual files inside an
Apple Mail mailbox, as this is usually an error.

• Moved Open in External Viewer command to the Record menu.

• Added keyboard shortcut for Open Source URL.

• Reordered Record menu.

• Reduced number of threads used on single-core Macs.

• You can now delete tags from the source list.

Bug Fixes

• Periods in the names of folders are now treated as part of the name, rather than as the
beginning of a path extension.

• Worked around OS bug that prevented phrase searching from working. Because of this,
EagleFiler will automatically rebuild the indexes of any opened libraries.

• Fixed bug that could cause a crash when importing large folder hierarchies.

• When importing a folder, EagleFiler will now ignore any invisible Find By Content index
files.

• Fixed bug importing and moving files with very long names.

• Fixed bug in .emlx exporter.

• Fixed bug where EagleFiler couldn’t import a Web page if WebKit crashed while trying to
extract its text.

• Fixed bug with using Capture command in Dock menu.

• Fixed bug where EagleFiler didn’t let you capture if you launched it by opening a library
from the Finder and then switched to another application so that it finished launching in the
background.

• The capture key is now ignored if EagleFiler is frontmost.

• Fixed spelling and resizing of “Title” label in the New Rich Text File sheet.

• Fixed crash that could occur when indexing.

• Fixed bug where an indexing operation could stall indefinitely.

• If a document or message can’t be indexed, EagleFiler is better at continuing on and indexing
the rest of the documents or messages.

• Better logging of index problems.

• Fixed bug where indexed searching didn’t work in tag sources.

• Fixed bug where undo didn’t work after renaming in source list.

• Fixed bug where the user could use drag and drop to change the page that the Web view was
displaying to one other than that of the selected Web archive.

• Better display of messages with no text parts.

• Fixed bug where the Recent smart folders didn’t show records that were inside folders.

• Fixed bug where Web archives couldn’t be displayed, depending on if you had certain prefer-
ences set in Safari.

259


• Fixed bug where the selection in the notes text view would be needlessly reset when the
library changed.

• Fixed bug that could lead to error when undoing too far in the notes text view.

• No longer allows you to give a file an empty name (before the extension), as this confuses
Cocoa.

• Fixed bug where the Show Inspector command opened the inspector but didn’t give it
keyboard focus.

• Worked around OS bug that could cause crash when using NetNewsWire Lite.

• Fixed a few bugs that made it impossible to launch EagleFiler from a path containing non-
ASCII characters.

• Fixed small memory leak when processing errors.

• Fixed bug where you couldn’t create a new folder with / in the name.

• Fixed bug where showed : instead of / when displaying file names.

• The file system encoding is no longer hard-coded to UTF-8.

• Improved thread-safety of record properties.

• When launching, no longer prints “CMSCreateDataProviderOrGetInfo : Invalid colorspace
type” message to console.

• Fixed bug where changes to a file’s name or title weren’t always propagated to the index.

• Fixed bug where source URLs weren’t being cached properly.

• Fixed bug opening aliases of libraries.

• Fixed bug where you couldn’t create or open a library if its path contained non-ASCII char-
acters.

• Worked around bug in SOHO Notes (and other applications) that prevented drag-and-drop
importing of promised files from working.

• Fixed bug importing notes from MailTags.

• Fixed bug where the drag image for a selected source used white text.

• Fixed bug where displaying an HTML e-mail message would take too long to timeout.

• Fixed bug in reporting HTML rendering errors.

• Fixed internal error when closing a library right after opening it.

• Improved error recovery when an untrusted server certificate is encountered while creating a
Web archive.

1.0.2—October 14, 2006

• Fixed bug capturing from Apple Mail.

1.0.1—October 14, 2006

• Fixed problem where EagleFiler would sometimes crash at launch if an input manager or haxie
was installed.

• Worked around OS bug that caused jitter in the software update progress bar.

• The software update installer no longer says it failed if it succeeded.

1.0—October 13, 2006

• First public release.

260

