# Time Capsule Letter

Dear [[Everett]].

This is your father talking to you, a few weeks before your due date. I cant wait to see you. I want you to know I will always love you know matter what happens. I will always be around for you. You're a part of me and I hope I live long enough to see you get married and have kids of your own.

I believe that's all I want in life, is for you to be happy and for your mother and I to be happy. I will do anything for you. I hope that when you read this you're proud to be my son..

I grew up the first 5 years of my life without a dad and you're never going to experience that, unless I'm dead, But just in case I don't make it till your 18th birthday, Ill tell you how my life was back in the day.

I met your mother at a rock show on Halloween of 2001. I was playing in the band mulligan with your two uncles Jake and Derek (ya know the ones your named after, more about them later) anyways your mom will say we first met at the fair but I don't remember that so don't believe that ok? I was 16 then and your mother was 14, but I knew when I first laid eyes on her she was the one for me and to this day I still feel the same, and trust me your mother and I have been down some bumpy roads, but we always seem to make it back to the main road again. As time went by your mom and I became closer and closer. Our love for each other is very strong, sometimes I don't pay enough attention to her but I'm trying my best, and I think she knows that…Fast Forwarding to nov 2004 when she first told me that she was pregnant with you. We were both scared and excited and young, and we are learning as we go and were gonna do the best we can do for you... Now the story of your name... .first off I hope you don't hate it I know a lot of people grow up hating their names but I feel strongly about yours and I hope u don't hold it against us... The first time I heard the name [[Everett]], I was playing a show with mulligan at the B E Henry building in Marshall with this band from chicago and their singers name was [[Everett]] and I was just like "dude your name is kickass!!" and from that day on I knew if I had a son I wanted his name to be [[Everett]]. Now your middle name comes from my 3 best friends Jacob Tyler Goheen, Derek Lee Feltner and Brett Lee Pudak all of whom I hope u get to know very well.... Jake, Derek, and I were all in Mulligan but I left after being in the band for almost 7 years to take care of you. My biological Father Mark never had time for me.. So if theres anything in life I have learned its that im always going to have time for you... Now about your grandparents Johnnie and Lori. First off Grandma does not like your name she says she refuses to call you [[Everett]] but you just tell her if she doesn't call u by your name you wont let her see you anymore haha!!! im just kidden grandma is going to spoil you so much. Now about grandpa he adopted me and married my mom when I was 5 or 6 it doesn't matter when because I would have no other person be my dad or your grandpa than him. He kept me in line when I was way out of it he and grandma have shaped me to be the man I am today because their love for me is never ending just like my love is for you... Most of all this letter your going to know before you read it but I wanted you to hear this all from me just incase I don't make it..... which I pray everyday I get to see you grow up and fall in love and play sports or music or whatever it is you want to do in life, but anything could happen from now till 18 years from now and if I don't make it know that I love you and you are my son and I hope I live until im 80 but if not take care of your mother.. And please stay away from all the bad things in life you know, drugs, getting into trouble you know that kind of thing... I Love you son I cant wait to see you Love Your Father
