# ClickMonitorDDC is a portable freeware tool to adjust brightness or contrast of a DDC compatible monitor by simply clicking a notification icon in the taskbar tray area, this icon also shows the actual monitor-values. There is support for multi monitors, shortcut link icon command line arguments and hot keys.

created: November 5, 2022 11:14 PM (UTC)
description: Simply click the notification icon in the taskbar tray area to adjust brightness or contrast, much more comfortable and faster than manually messing around with monitor buttons, works with external monitors (DDC-protocol) and internal LCD-Display of notebooks/laptops. The notification icons inform you about the monitor values, you simply look at the icons to check if the wanted values are already set. You can adjust brightness, contrast and volume by using sliders or clicking buttons, but ClickMonitorDDC can also deal with command lines in all possible ways, assign hot keys, create context menu popup entries, use batch files or append arguments in icon properties shortcut target. You can use multiple arguments, lower/uppercase and spaces are optional. For instance  b20 c30  sets monitor brightness 20 and contrast 30  optionally you can prepend monitornumber (1 or higher), for instance 2 c55 2 b40  sets second monitor contrast 55 and brightness 40  b+6 c-8 increases actual brightness by 6 and decreases actual contrast by 8  v90 sets volume to 90%, v+10 increases volume by 10%, v-8 decreases volume by 8% m for mute, u for unmute, x for shutting off monitors, q quits program, ? shows a notification about the actual values. The portable file can be run from any location without installation, needs windows 7/8/10 You use this software at your own risk, I disclaim any responsibility for any harm. You are allowed to use and spread this program for free.
folder: BOOKMRKS-MTHRFCKR / PIRACY-MTHRFCKR / Useful-Stuff / Useful Stuff Software
tags: software, useful stuff
url: https://web.archive.org/web/20200803212815/https://clickmonitorddc.bplaced.net