# Valhalla Super Massive - Valhalla DSP

cover: https://valhalladsp.com/wp-content/uploads/2020/05/Supermassive_Aura_1300x540.png
created: October 28, 2022 7:37 PM (UTC)
description: Make some space.  ValhallaSupermassive has been designed from the ground up for MASSIVE delays and reverbs.   Get ready for luscious clouds of reverb, otherworldly delays, and swelling waves of feedback unlike any you’ve heard before.  Supermassive has 16 out-of-this-world reverb/delay modes:    Gemini: Fast attack, shorter decay, high echo density.   Hydra: Fast-ish attack, shorter decay, low to high echo density (depending on the DENSITY control setting)   Centaurus: Medium attack, longer decay, medium to high echo density (depending on the DENSITY control setting)   Sagittarius: Slow attack, longer decay, high echo density   Great Annihilator: Medium attack, very long decay, medium to high echo density (depending on the DENSITY control setting)   Andromeda: Slowest attack, very long decay, very high echo density   Lyra: Fast attack, shorter decay, low echo density   Capricorn: Fast attack, shorter decay, medium echo density   Large Magellanic Cloud: Long reverb, LOOOONG repeating echoes, long decay, medium attack   Triangulum: Long reverb, VERY LONG repeating echoes, long decay, slow attack   Cirrus Major: Low/medium echo density, strange repeating patterns, fast attack   Cirrus Minor: Low echo density, strange repeating patterns, fast attack, smaller than Cirrus Major  Cassiopeia: Initially low echo density that quickly builds to long and lush reverbs, mysterious repeating patterns, fast attack  Orion: the much bigger version of Cassiopeia. Low echo density that can build to enormous reverbs, fast attack, strange resonances and repeating patterns.  Aquarius (New in 2.0.0): a dedicated EchoVerb algorithm, with a strong audible echo/de;au that can morph into a lush reverb with higher DENSITY settings  Pisces (New in 2.0.0): the bigger sibling of Aquarius. EchoVerb, with even denser and lusher reverbs on tap than Aquarius.  All Valhalla plugins are self-documenting, so you can rollover the controls for the tooltip.  And it's free.  No strings attached.   Just download to blow your mind and your music to new levels of consciousness and experience.  Update Notes:   Version 2.0.0 for Mac (Intel/M1) and Windows available Valhalla Supermassive is the best free reverb in the universe. Make pointillistic echoes, lush reverbs, echo clusters, and all sorts of sounds in between.
folder: BOOKMRKS-MTHRFCKR / MEDIA-MTHRFCKR / Audio / Pro Audio / VST
tags: vst
url: https://valhalladsp.com/shop/reverb/valhalla-supermassive