# Clozapine and Cocaine Effects on Dopamine and Sero

Available online at www.sciencedirect.com

ELSEVIER  
SCIENCE DIRECT Progress in Neuro-Psychopharmacology & Biological Psychiatry 28 (2004) 157-171  
Progress In Neuro-Psychopharmacology & Biological Psychiatry www. elsevier. com/locate/pnpbp

Clozapine and cocaine effects on dopamine and serotonin release in nucleus accumbens during psychostimulant behavior and withdrawal Patricia A. Broderick a,b ’ c ’ d ’*, Omotola Hope 3 ’ 0,1 , Catherine Okonji a,c ’ 2 , David N. Rahni a,e , Yueping Zhou a ’ 3 a Department of Physiology and Pharmacology, City University of New York Medical School, Room Harris 309, Convent Avenue, West 138th Street, New York, NY 10031, USA ^Doctoral Programs, Departments of Biology and Psychology, City University of New York Graduate School, New York, NY, USA 'MARC and MBRS Programs, City College of New York, New York, NY, USA d Department of Neurology, Comprehensive Epilepsy Center NYU, School of Medicine, New York University, New York, NY, USA ^Department of Chemistry and Physical Sciences, Pace University, Pleasantville, NY, USA Accepted 17 September 2003 Abstract There is an increasing awareness that a psychosis, similar to that of schizophrenic psychosis, can be derived from cocaine addiction. Thus, the prototypical atypical antipsychotic medication, clozapine, a 5-HT 2 /DA 2 antagonist, was studied for its effects on cocaineinduced dopamine (DA) and serotonin (5-HT) release in nucleus accumbens (NAcc) of behaving male Sprague-Dawley laboratory rats with In Vivo Microvoltammetry, while animals’ locomotor (forward ambulations), an A lo behavior, was monitored at the same time with infrared photobeams. Release mechanisms for monoamines were determined by using a depolarization blocker, gamma-butyrolactone (yBL). BRODERICK PROBE® microelectrodes selectively detected release of DA and 5-HT within seconds and sequentially in A lo nerve terminals, NAcc. Acute and subacute studies were performed for each treatment group. Acute studies are defined as single injection of drug(s) after a stable baseline of each monoamine and locomotor behavior has been achieved. Subacute studies are defined as 24h follow-up studies on each monoamine and locomotor behavior, in the same animal at which time, no further drug was administered. Results showed that (1) acute administration of cocaine (10 mg/kg ip) (n = 5) significantly increased both DA and 5-HT release above baseline (P < .001) while locomotion was also significantly increased above baseline ( P < .001). In subacute studies, DA release decreased significantly below baseline (P< .001) and significant decreases in 5-HT release occurred at the 15-min mark and at each time point during the second part of the hour (P < .05); the maximum decrease in 5-HT was 40% below baseline. Locomotor behavior, on the other hand, increased significantly above baseline ( P< .05). (2) Acute administration of clozapine/cocaine (20 and 10 mg/kg ip, respectively; n = 6) produced a significant block of the cocaine-induced increase in DA (P< .001) and 5-HT release (P< .001). Cocaine-induced locomotion was blocked simultaneously with each monoamine by clozapine as well ( P < .001). In subacute studies, DA release continued to be blocked presumably via clozapine by exhibiting a statistically significant decrease (P<.001), but 5-HT release increased significantly ( P< .001), while cocaine-induced locomotor activity also continued to be antagonized by clozapine, i.e., locomotor activity exhibited no difference from baseline ( P> .05). In summary, acute studies (a) support previous data from this laboratory and others that cocaine acts as a stimulant on the monoamines, DA and 5-HT and on locomotor behavior as well and (b) show that clozapine, 5-HT 2 /DA 2 Abbreviations: APM, activity pattern monitor; AA, ascorbic acid; BSA, bovine serum albumin; DOPAC, 3,4dihydroxyphenylacetic acid; DOI, [(±)-2,5dimethoxy-4-iodoamphetamine hydrochloride]; DA, dopamine; DR, Dorsal Raphe; EPS, Extrapyramidal Symptoms; "yBL, gamma-butyrolactone; HVA, homovanillic acid; R(+)-8-OH-DPAT, [R(+)-8-hydroxy-2-(di-n-propylamino)-tetralin]; 5-HIAA, 5-hydroxyindoleacetic acid; IACUC, Institutional Animal Care and Use Committee; A lo , mesolimbic pathway/mesocorticolimbic neuronal pathway; A 9 , nigrostriatal neuronal pathway; NE, norepinephrine; NAcc, Nucleus Accumbens; PEA, phosphotidylethanolamine; pA, picoamperes; PFC, Prefrontal Cortex; RR, Raman Resonance; 5-HT, serotonin; Ag/Ag/Cl, silver/ silver chloride; 24-h follow-up studies, subacute studies; SERS, Surface Enhanced Raman Spectroscopy; TH, tyrosine hydroxylase; UA, uric acid; VTA, Ventral Tegmental Area; vlNAcc, ventrolateral Nucleus Accumbens. * Corresponding author. Department of Physiology and Pharmacology, City University of New York Medical School, Room Harris 309, Convent Avenue, West 138th Street, New York, NY 10031, USA. Tel.: +1-212-650-5479; fax: +1-212-650-7754. E-mail address: drpabroderick@cs.com (P.A. Broderick). 1 Presently at Yale University School of Medicine. 2 Presently at Baylor University School of Medicine. 3 Presently at Johns Hopkins School of Medicine. 0278-5846/$ - see front matter © 2003 Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved. doi: 10.1016/j .pnpbp.2003.09.032

$  
158 P.A. Broderick et al. / Progress in Neuro-Psychopharmacology & Biological Psychiatry 28 (2004) 157—171

antagonist, blocked enhanced DA, 5-HT and psychomotor stimulant behavior induced by cocaine. Subacute studies (a) suggest that withdrawal responses occurred in the cocaine group, based on recorded deficiencies in monoamine neurotransmitters (b) show that withdrawal effects in the cocaine group likely presynaptic, were distinguished from locomotor behavior, classically known to be mediated postsynaptically, and finally, (c) suggest that clozapine, with longer lived pharmacokinetic properties, reversed 5-HT cocaine-related withdrawal effects, but was unable to reverse DA cocaine-related withdrawal responses. Taken together with data from this laboratory, in which the 5-HT 2A/2C antagonist, ketanserin, affected cocaine neurochemistry in much the same way as did clozapine, a mediation by either separate or combined 5-HT 2A /2c receptors for these clozapine/cocaine interactions, is suggested. Further studies, designed to tease out the responses of selective 5-HT 2A and 5-HT 2C receptor compounds to cocaine and clozapine/cocaine, are underway. © 2003 Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved. Keywords: A 9 ; Aj 0 ; Acute; Animal models of psychosis; Autoreceptors; BRODERICK PROBE® microelectrodes; 5-HT2/DA2 antagonists; Clozapine; Clozapine/cocaine combination; Cocaine; Cocaine withdrawal; Depression; Dopamine (DA); In Vivo Microvoltammetry; Locomotor (ambulatory) activity; Negative symptoms; Nucleus accumbens (NAcc); Open-field behavior; Positive symptoms; Psychostimulants; Raman Resonance (RR); Schizophrenia; Serotonin (5-HT); Subacute; Surface Enhanced Raman Spectroscopy (SERS); Withdrawal

1. Introduction 1.1. Addiction and psychoses We continue to strategize possible pharmacotherapies for cocaine-induced psychosis by studying the effects of a variety of typical and atypical antipsychotic medications on cocaine-induced neurochemistry and psychomotor stimulant behavior. The hypothesis derives from similarities between schizophrenic and cocaine psychosis, similarities which are being reported in the clinical literature at an alarming rate (Brady et al., 1991; Harris and Batki, 2000; Lysaker et al., 1994; Mendoza et al., 1992; Miller et al., 1992; Mitchell and Vierkant, 1991; Nambudin and Young, 1991; Rosenthal and Miner, 1997; Rosse et al., 1994; Satel and Edell, 1991; Serper et al., 1999; Sherer et al., 1988; Taylor and Staby, 1992; Tueth, 1993). Cocaine psychosis is a major psychopathology (Satel et al., 1991) and hyperfunction of DA (dopamine)-ergic systems is a critical element in cocaine-induced psychosis (Lieberman et al., 1990). Too, what complicates the situation further, are data which show that about 50% of the patients who suffer from schizophrenia have also been substance abusers at some time during their illness. Actually, schizophrenic patients are reported to feel the need to alleviate their psychosis by selftreating with reinforcing drugs (Buckley, 1998; Mueser et al., 1995). 1.2. Psychomotor stimulant animal model of addiction and psychosis One way to strategize such treatments for cocaine addiction and psychosis is to reverse certain elements of the disorders by utilizing laboratory studies in animals (McKinney, 1989). The strategy is reasonable especially since data from animal studies of stimulant psychosis and human schizophrenic psychosis share the same neurochemical and behavioral manifestations (Gawin et al., 1989; Margolin et al., 1995; Wise, 1995; Wise and Bozarth, 1987). Also,  
because cocaine is self-administered universally across species (Fischman, 1984; Risner and Jones, 1980), it is highly likely that similar universal underlying reward mechanisms and mechanisms of consequent adverse symptomatology are similar from species to species. The animal model of psychomotor stimulant behavior for cocaine addiction and psychosis has been validated by using this model to correlate antipsychotic medications and DA-ergic neuroanatomic pathways, for example, but not exclusively, typical antipsychotics act through DA within nigrostriatal pathways and atypical antipsychotics act through DA and 5-HT within mesolimbic and mesocorticolimbic pathways (Cools and van Rossum, 1970; Costall and Naylor, 1973; Kelly et al., 1975; Pijnenburg et al., 1975; Wise and Bozarth, 1987). Human data support these animal data (Gawin and Kleber, 1986a,b; Gawin et al., 1989; Meltzer, 1989). Interestingly, it is currently thought that both typical and atypical antipsychotic agents alleviate schizophrenic psychosis via DA 2 blockade in mesocorticolimbic areas, whereas DA 2 blockade in nigrostriatal areas is thought to produce motor side effects, extrapyramidal symptoms (EPS). Nonetheless, the psychomotor stimulant animal model has become an accepted model to study cocaine psychosis, albeit limited to certain aspects of the disease. An accepted neuroanatomic site for testing reversal of positive symptoms of psychosis is within nucleus accumbens (NAcc), mesolimbic nerve terminals (Weinberger et al., 1992). 1.3. Cocaine, monoamine transporters and release mechanisms Cocaine has a high affinity for monoamine transporters, and via these transporters, re-uptake of monoamines into presynaptic nerve terminals is inhibited (Izenwasser et al., 1990; Koe, 1976); interestingly, certain subjective reward and jittery effects from cocaine have recently been associated with these monoamine transporters (Hall et al., 2002). In addition, cocaine has been shown to be dependent on

PA. Broderick et al. / Progress in Neuro-Psychopharmacology & Biological Psychiatry 28 (2004) 157—171 159

stimulated release mechanisms (Ng et al., 1991) and on basal release mechanism by using the DA impulse flow inhibitor, gamma butyrolactone (yBL) (Broderick, 1991b). Although cocaine is not a direct receptor acting agonist, enhancement of DA neurotransmission may also be provided adjunctly through indirect activation of DA receptors, i.e., Dj and D 2 (Spealman et al., 1992; Wise, 1995). 1.4. Cocaine, monoamine concentrations and reward mechanisms Cocaine increases DA concentrations in mesolimbic neuronal circuits and the evidence suggests that the mechanism underlying cocaine’s rewarding effect involves hyperfunction of the mesolimbic DA system, particularly in Aio nerve terminals, NAcc (Broderick, 1991a,b; Brown et al., 1991; Hernandez andHoebel, 1988; Kalivas andNemeroff, 1988) and in A i0 somatodendrites, ventral tegmental area (VTA) (Bradberry and Roth, 1989; Broderick, 1992a; Einhorn et al., 1988; Kalivas, 1993; Kalivas and Duffy, 1990). There is a general consensus from both clinical and preclinical studies that DA mediates the rewarding effects of cocaine (de Wit and Wise, 1977; Gawin et al., 1989; Lieberman et al., 1990; Roberts and Koob, 1982; Roberts et al., 1977; Tsibulsky et al., 1998; Wise, 1995; Wise and Bozarth, 1987; Wise and Rompre, 1989). Cocaine increases 5-HT concentrations in A lo terminals, NAcc, after single administration (Bradberry et al., 1993; Broderick et al., 1993). Sensitized 5-HT efflux in NAcc occurs after repeated cocaine administration (Parsons and Justice, 1993) and cocaine-increases 5-HT release induced by electrical stimulation of A lo neurons, in vitro (Chen and Reith, 1993). Importantly, when 5-HT concentrations are deficient, such as in the Fawn-Hooded laboratory rat, cocaine-induced increases in 5-HT release are attenuated (Hope et al., 1995). Consistent with increased concentrations of 5-HT after cocaine, cocaine inhibits 5-HT re-uptake in vitro (Ross and Renyi, 1969) and more recent studies have shown that cocaine inhibits 5-HT re-uptake specifically in NAcc (Galloway, 1990). Also consistent with increased concentrations of 5-HT after cocaine, cocaine represses impulse frequency rates in vivo and in vitro in 5-HT somatodendrites, DR (Cunningham and Lakoski, 1988; Pan and William, 1989). Furthermore, 5-HT-cocaine interactions have been associated with transporter mechanisms (Carroll et al., 1993; Hall et al., 2002; Reith et al., 1983). Nonetheless, a precise association between 5-HT and brain reward remains to be determined. Dietary 1-tryptophan, a 5-HT precursor, and fluoxetine, a 5-HT re-uptake inhibitor, have been reported to reduce cocaine self-administration (Carroll et al., 1990a,b; McGregor et al., 1993; Peltier et al., 1994) and depletion of forebrain 5-HT with parachlorophenylalanine (PCPA) facilitates cocaine self-administration (Loh and Roberts, 1990; Richardson and Roberts, 1991). However, there are studies that are discrepant  
from these previous studies (Porrino et al., 1989). Also, selfstimulation studies, using 5-HT 2 a antagonists and mixed DA 2 /5-HT 2A antagonists, have suggested no involvement between 5-HT 2A , brain stimulation and cocaine stimulation reward (Frank et al., 1995; Moser et al., 1995; Ramana and Desiraju, 1989; Tsibulsky et al., 1998). Particularly relevant is a possible interpretation from the latter studies that atypical antipsychotics may not affect the regulation of positive affect while still blocking neurochemical and behavioral effects of cocaine, which may lead to psychosis. 1.5. Cocaine, monoamines and psychomotor stimulant behavior Intra-NAcc infusions of cocaine mimics the hyperlocomotor effects of cocaine (Delfs et al., 1990) and the DA mesolimbic pathway has been directly implicated in the behavioral effects of cocaine (Kalivas and Nemeroff, 1988). Manipulations of 5-HT modulate the locomotor stimulant effects of cocaine (Walsh and Cunningham, 1997). Cocaine increases 5-HT in DA mesolimbic pathways simultaneously with increased locomotion, but the temporal pattern is disrupted compared with 5-HT increases with exploratory activity (Broderick, 2001). Specific 5-HT receptor mediation has been shown to correlate with open-field locomotion, e.g., local application of 5-HT and 5-HT 1A agonist, 8-OH-DPAT into median raphe nuclei causes hyperactivity (Hillegaart et al., 1989) and 8-OH-DPAT, has been shown to up-modulate cocaine-induced psychostimulant behavior (De La Garza and Cunningham, 2000). Specific 5-HT 2A and 5-HT 2C receptor mediation has been shown to correlate with cocaine-induced hyperactivity (Filip and Cunningham, 2002; McMahon and Cunningham, 2001; McMahon et al., 2001). 1.6. Monoamine interactions, basis for cocaine mechanisms Turnover of DA is altered in NAcc when the 5-HT somatodendrites, DR, are electrolytically lesioned and these interactions modulate locomotion (Costall et al., 1976, 1990; Herve et al., 1979). Somatodendrites for DA, VTA, contain dense networks of 5-HT axonal varicosities (Broderick and Phelix, 1997; Herve et al., 1987; Steinbusch, 1981; Van Bockstaele et al., 1994) and axons in NAcc core and shell exhibit overlapping of tyrosine hydroxylase (TH) and 5-HT (Phelix and Broderick, 1995; Van Bockstaele and Pickel, 1993). 1.7. Pharmacotherapies for psychoses Pharmacotherapies for cocaine psychosis are virtually nonexistent. Thus far, clinicians are relying for therapy on antipsychotic medications and reasonably so because, as mentioned previously, neurochemical and behavioral similarities exist between schizophrenic and cocaine psychosis. Our main focus, then, is also in treatment strategies for

160 PA. Broderick et al. / Progress in Neuro-Psychopharmacology & Biological Psychiatry 28 (2004) 157—171

cocaine based on antipsychotics, particularly in the area of atypical antipsychotic medications due to their dual interactions on dopamine (DA) and serotonin (5-HT) in DA neuronal pathways primarily in the mesolimbic/mesocorticolimbic A lo neuronal circuitry. This now well-known 5HT 2 /DA 2 receptor affinity in the Ai 0 circuit helps to alleviate both positive and negative symptoms of psychosis in addition to being mood enhancers (Meltzer, 1989, 1992). The leading hypothesis for the mechanism of action of these newer generation, atypical antipsychotic agents, is the presence of a high 5-HT-DA receptor blockade ratio in mesolimbic and mesocorticolimbic neural circuits. When 5HT-ergic activity is blocked as is the case with many atypical antipsychotics, DA inhibition of DA release is also blocked, consequently, increasing presynaptic DA release and balancing DA blockade at postsynaptic receptor sites. The final result is less risk for EPS (Glazer, 2000). 1.8. Clozapine Clozapine is considered to be the prototype of the atypical antipsychotics as it was the first to be recognized as having few if any EPS, not causing tardive dyskinesia or Parkinson’s side effects including dystonia (Lieberman et al., 1989; Parsa et al., 1991). It is interesting that clozapine is not generally a first line defense drug against schizophrenia, but clozapine is especially effective for treating drug-resistant schizophrenia, when typical antipsychotics have failed the patient (Kane et al., 1988; Ranjan and Meltzer, 1996). Clozapine does not produce catalepsy (Kruzich and See, 2000). On the other hand, it is well known that clozapine may produce agranulocytosis in .0.5-2% of patients; blood serum levels must be monitored weekly for the first 6 months. Sedation and weight gain are limiting factors in clozapine treatment (Stahl, 2000). The varied effects of clozapine may come about because the receptor-binding profile for clozapine is complex. Clozapine binds to the following receptors: 5-HT i A , 5-HT 2 a , 5HT 2C , 5-HT3, 5-HT 6 , 5-HT 7 , DA b DA 2 , DA 3 , DA4, M b H b a b and a 2 (Brunello et al., 1995; Pere, 1995; Schotte et al., 1993, 1996; Stahl, 2000). Clozapine has high affinity for 5HT 2 a receptors and low affinity for DA 2 receptors (Meltzer, 1991, 1999; Meltzer and Nash, 1991; Meltzer et al., 1992). Of the occupancy ratios for atypical antipsychotic medication, clozapine has the lowest occupancy for DA 2 receptors (Kapur and Remington, 2001; Meltzer et al., 1992). 1.9. Clozapine/cocaine Clozapine is an excellent candidate to test reversal of cocaine’s effect, not only because of low DA receptor occupancy which is thought to reduce EPS, but also because clozapine is prescribed for cocaine addiction with reasonable success, i.e., clozapine pretreatment diminishes subjec-  
tive responses to cocaine, including expected high and rush responses (Farren et al., 2000). In another study, pretreatment with clozapine has been shown to alleviate cocaine abuse in more than 85% of active substance (cocaine) abusers (Zimmet et al., 2000). 2. Methods 2.1. Drugs Clozapine was obtained from Sigma Aldrich, St. Louis, MO, dissolved in distilled water, and the pH of the solution was adjusted to 2.7 with citric acid powder. Cocaine was obtained from Sigma Aldrich, and dissolved in distilled water. 2.2. Animals Animals were purchased from Charles River Laboratories, Kingston, NY, and were housed in our animal care facilities for 1 to 2 weeks before surgery was performed. The Animal Care Facility operates under the auspices of the CUNY, City College Institutional Animal Care and Use Committee (IACUC) in compliance with National Institute of Health (NIH) guidelines. The weight range for the animals, at the time of the studies, was 350-475 g. Animals were group housed before surgery, individually housed after surgery and fed Purina Rat Chow and water ad libitum. A 12-h dark-light cycle was maintained both in the housing of the animals and throughout the experimental studies. 2.3. Surgical procedures and implantation of microelectrodes 2.3.1. Protocols follow paradigm described in Broderick et al. (2003) Each animal was anesthetized with pentobarbital Na, {50 mg/kg ip [dilute (6%) solution]} and stereotaxically implanted with a BRODERICK PROBE® indicator microelectrode in ventrolateral (vl) NAcc (AP + 2.6, ML + 2.5, DV—7.3) (Pellegrino et al., 1979). The stereotaxic equipment was purchased from David Kopf Instruments, Tujunga, CA. A Ag/AgCl reference electrode was placed in contact with dura, 7 mm anteriorally and contralaterally to the indicator microelectrode. A stainless steel auxiliary microelectrode was placed in contact with dura. BRODERICK PROBE® microelectrodes were manufactured on site. Animals’ body temperature was continuously monitored with a rectal probe and thermometer (Fisher Sci., Fadem, NJ). Body temperature was maintained at 37.5 ± 0.5 °C with an aquamatic K module heating pad (Amer. Hosp. Supply, Edison, NJ). Booster injections of pentobarbital Na were administered once after the first 2 h of surgery (0.10 cc) and once every subsequent hour (0.05 cc) to maintain an adequate level of anesthesia throughout surgery. The total

PA. Broderick et al. / Progress in Neuro-Psychopharmacology & Biological Psychiatry 28 (2004) 157—171 161

time for surgery was 3-4 h. The indicator, reference, and auxiliary microelectrodes were held in place with dental acrylic (Jet Line, Lang Dental, CA). Animals recovered in a bedded Plexiglas cage [dimensions: 12x12x18 in. (width x depth x height)] after surgery and before the experimental studies began, with food and water ad libitum. The animals were treated with physiological saline (0.5 cc) immediately and for 1-2 days after surgery as needed. The antibiotic, chloramphenicol (50 mg/kg ip) was administered if needed. In vivo microvoltammetric studies on conscious Sprague-Dawley laboratory rats were begun 9-15 days after the aseptic surgical operations were performed. On each experimental day, the animal was placed in a Plexiglas-copper faradaic chamber. The three-microelectrode assembly, enclosed within the animal’s prosthetic acrylic cap, was connected to a CV37 detector by means of a mercury commutator (Br. Res. Instr., Princeton, NJ), a flexible cable, and a mating connector (BJM Electronics, Staten Island, NY). The CV37 detector was electrically connected to a Minigard surge suppresser (Jefferson Electric, Magnetek, NY), which was then connected to an electrical ground in isolation. Stable electrochemical signals for DA and 5-HT were evident before either (i) clozapine (20 mg/kg ip), (ii) cocaine (10 mg/kg ip) or (iii) combination of clozapine and cocaine (20 and 10 mg/kg ip, respectively) were administered. Each animal was used as its own control. Changes in synaptic concentrations of DA and 5-HT are presented as percent change (percent of control) to minimize normal between-animal variations. Currents recorded were in the order of magnitude of pA or nA. In vivo microvoltammetric scans were recorded in seconds and repeated every 5 min for a period of 2 h before each treatment and a period of 2 h after each treatment. 2.4. In vivo microvoltammetry: technology In Vivo Microvoltammetry with a semidifferential (semiderivative) circuit was used; a clear separation of the monoamine neurotransmitters, DA and 5-HT was achieved. Dopamine and 5-HT were detected within seconds in separate signals. Oxidation peak potentials (half-wave potentials) of +0.14 ±0.015 and +0.29 ±0.015 V were characteristic for DA and 5-HT. Detailed methodology is published (Broderick, 1988, 1989, 1990, 1991b, 1999, 2001, 2002; Broderick and Pacia, 2003; Broderick et al., 1993, 2000). The electrochemical signal for DA, was detected without interference at the same oxidation potential, from 3-4-dihydroxyphenylacetic acid (DOPAC), homovanillic acid (HVA) and ascorbic acid (AA). Indeed, clear and separated signals are routinely achieved with BRODERICK PROBE® microelectrodes for AA, HVA and DOPAC. The electrochemical signal for 5-HT was detected without interference at the same oxidation potential, from the 5-HT metabolite, 5-hydroxyindoleacetic acid (5-HIAA) and uric acid (UA). Potentials were applied with a CV37  
detector (BAS, West Lafayette, IN). Potentials were applied from—0.2 V to +0.4 V with respect to a Ag/AgCl (1 M NaCl) electrode, at a scan rate of 10 mV/s at time constants of 5 and 1 s tau. One scan was completed in 60 s. Nonfaradaic charging current was eliminated in the first 25 s. The neurotransmitters, DA and 5-HT, were detected in approximately 10-15 and 10-12 s, respectively, with BRODERICK PROBE® stearic scid microelectrodes and 10-12 and 8-10 s, respectively, with BRODERICK PROBE® lauric acid microelectrodes. The coulombic efficiency for the detection of 5-HT was twoto threefold greater than that for DA (Broderick, 1987). Calibration curves were determined experimentally, in vitro, in a freshly prepared deoxygenated physiological saline-phosphate buffer solution (0.01 M, pH = 7.4). We use ultra pure nitrogen (N 2 ) (T.W. Smith Corp., Brooklyn, NY) to deoxygenate the buffer solution. Solutions of DA and 5-HT (99% purity, Sigma Aldrich) as well as metabolites of the monoamines, were aliquoted into the buffer and the peak height of the electrochemical signals were correlated with specific nM and pM concentrations. Calibration studies were also performed in freshly prepared deoxygenated buffer solutions containing phosphotidylethanolamine (PEA), combined with bovine serum albumin (BSA) (Sigma Aldrich), a solution which closely mimics brain constituents. These studies showed that lipid constituents of brain and not proteins, amplify the detection sensitivity of the indicator microelectrodes, supporting previous data which show that lipids amplify electrochemical signals detected by BRODERICK PROBE® microelectrodes; the phenomenon is termed The Lipid Amplification Number (LAN) (Broderick, 1999; Broderick et al., 2000). Surface Enhanced Raman Spectroscopy (SERS) and Raman Resonance (RR) techniques have correlated our findings on signal amplification by lipids (Foucault et al., 2002). Detection limits for basal synaptic concentrations of DA and 5-HT in NAcc were 12 and 2 nM, respectively. Placement of indicator microelectrodes in NAcc of each animal, was confirmed by the potassium ferrocyanide blue dot method, using a current of 50 mA for period of 30 s. Virtually no damage to brain tissue occurred. Recording characteristics of microelectrodes were stable. 2.5. Behavior Locomotor activity (ambulation) was monitored with infrared photobeams at the same time as DA and 5-HT release in NAcc was detected with the BRODERICK PROBE® in conjunction with In Vivo Microvoltammetry. The chamber was faradaic, covered with copper to refract possible electrical artifacts [dimensions: 24 x 18 x 23.5 in. (width x depth x height)]. A 16 x 16 array of these infrared photobeams, were held in place by an aluminum frame which was situated 3/4 in above the Plexiglas floor of the chamber to detect locomotor activity. Photobeams were sampled by a Pentium computer to define the x-y position

162 PA. Broderick et al. / Progress in Neuro-Psychopharmacology & Biological Psychiatry 28 (2004) 157—171

of the animal within a 1.5 in resolution every 100 ms. When an x-y position was calculated, it was used to define the frequency of locomotor activity in counts. The locomotor activity system is a modified version of an Activity Pattern Monitor (APM) (San Diego Instruments, San Diego, CA). Behavioral data are presented in absolute frequency, i.e., number of counts recorded. The first hour predrug allowed exploratory behavior. Exploratory behavior is defined as open-field behavior of ambulations (forward locomotion) wherein animals respond to the stimuli of a novel environment with high frequency of behavioral counts. The second hour predrug allowed the animal to become habituated before treatment. Habituation behavior is defined as a behavioral state in which behavior exhibits reduced responses to novel stimuli; animals cease exploring or searching in their novel environment and maintain a steady-state response to novel stimuli. In the acute studies, each drug was administered at the end of the habituation period. Baseline (control) values were taken every 5 min for the last 30 min of the habituation period at which time drug injection(s) took place. Electrochemical recordings for DA and 5-HT release in NAcc, were continued for 2 h; at the same time, locomotor behavior continued to be monitored and recorded with infrared photobeams. At the end of the 2 h drug(s) study, animals were then placed back in their home cages. In the subacute studies, which took place 24 h later, the animals were again placed in the faradaic behavioral chamber and no further drug was administered. Recordings of separate electrochemical signals for DA and 5-HT release in NAcc, were taken for 1 h; at the same time, locomotor behavior was monitored and recorded with infrared photobeams. 2.6. Data analysis Neurochemical and behavioral data, derived from the last 30 min of the habituation period, provided the baseline data. Statistically significant differences between baseline and postdrug injection(s) for (1) DA (2) 5-HT and (3) locomotor behavior were determined by subjecting the data to one-way analysis of variance (ANOVA) (tested at criteria Z 3 =.05), with subsequent application of the post hoc test, Tukey’s Multiple Comparison Test; where appropriate, data points in the time course were subjected to 95% confidence limits (C.L.). 3. Results 3.1. Day 1: acute studies: Effects of cocaine or clozapine/ cocaine combination on DA release in NAcc Cocaine (open circles): Cocaine significantly increased DA release over baseline (habituation) values (one-way  
ANOVA: P<.0001; F=51.17; #=3,56). Post hoc analysis showed that significant differences between precocaine (baseline) and postcocaine (same animal control) occurred as well (Tukey’s Multiple Comparison Test: P<.001, q = 9.498). Clozapine/cocaine (closed circles): Clozapine significantly blocked the effects of cocaine on DA release (oneway ANOVA: P<.0001; F=51.17; #=3,56). Post hoc analysis showed significant differences between cocaine and clozapine/cocaine groups (Tukey’s Multiple Comparison Test: P< .001, q= 16.43) (see Fig. 1A). 3.2. Day 1: acute studies: effects of cocaine and clozapine/ cocaine combination on 5-HT release in NAcc Cocaine (open circles): Cocaine significantly increased 5-HT release over baseline (habituation) values (one-way ANOVA: P<.0001; F= 154.2; #=3,56). Post hoc analysis showed that significant differences between precocaine (baseline) and postcocaine (same animal control) occurred as well (Tukey’s Multiple Comparison Test: P<.001, q= 16.19). Clozapine/cocaine (closed circles): Clozapine significantly blocked the effects of cocaine on 5-HT release (one-way ANOVA: P<.0001; F= 154.2; #=3,56). Post hoc analysis showed significant differences between cocaine and clozapine/cocaine groups (Tukey’s Multiple Comparison Test: P<.001, q = 28. 98) (see Fig. IB). 3.3. Day 1: acute studies: effects of cocaine and clozapine/ cocaine combination on locomotion (ambulations) Cocaine (open circles): Cocaine significantly increased locomotor activity (ambulations) over baseline (habituation) values (one-way ANOVA: P<.0001; F= 13.06; #=3,56). Post hoc analysis showed that significant differences between precocaine (baseline) and postcocaine (same animal control) occurred as well (Tukey’s Multiple Comparison Test: P<.01, q = 5.688). Clozapine/cocaine (closed circles): Clozapine significantly blocked the effects of cocaine on locomotor activity (one-way ANOVA: P<.0001, F= 13.06; #=3,56). Post hoc analysis showed significant differences between cocaine and clozapine/cocaine groups (Tukey’s Multiple Comparison Test: P<.001, ? = 7.784) (Fig. 1C). 3.4. Day 2: subacute studies: effects of cocaine or clozapine/cocaine combination on DA release in NAcc Cocaine (open circles): During the subacute studies, when no further cocaine was administered, DA release in NAcc significantly decreased from baseline (habituation) values (from a significant increase) (one-way ANOVA: P<.0001; F= 106.3; #=3,30). Post hoc analysis showed that significant differences occurred between baseline (Day 1) and (Day 2) values (same animal control) (Tukey’s

PA. Broderick et al. / Progress in Neuro-Psychopharmacology & Biological Psychiatry 28 (2004) 157—171 163

Multiple Comparison Test: P<.001, <7 =18.99). Compared to drug effect on Day 1, DA release was decreased dramatically by about 80% during the hour period of study. ◄ --------► ◄ -------------------------------------------------------► Pre-Drug Post Drug Time in Minutes 800-,  
Clozapine/cocaine (closed circles): During the subacute studies, when no further drug(s) were administered, DA release in NAcc significantly decreased from baseline (habituation) values (one-way ANOVA: P<.0001; F= 106.3; #=3,30). Post hoc analysis showed that a significant difference occurred between baseline (Dayl) and (Day 2) values (same animal control). (Tukey’s Multiple Comparison Test: P<.001, <7=16.48). A significant difference between cocaine and clozapine/cocaine (Day 2) groups did not occur (Tukey’s Multiple Comparison Test: P>.05, q = 2.985) (Fig. 2A). 3.5. Day 2: subacute studies: effects of cocaine or clozapine/cocaine combination on 5-HT release in NAcc Cocaine (open circles): During the subacute studies, when no further cocaine was administered, 5-HT release in NAcc was decreased below baseline (Day 1) values compared to (Day 2) values, at specific time points during the time course of the 1-h study, i.e., at the 15-min mark and at each time point in second part of the hour (P< .05); (oneway ANOVA: P<.0001; F= 38.99; #=3,30), although the post hoc analysis did not show statistical significance for the hour (Tukey’s Multiple Comparison Test: P>.05, <7 = 3.225). Compared to drug effect on Day 1, 5-HT release was decreased dramatically by approximately 150% in the second half hour of the study. Clozapine/cocaine (closed circles): During the subacute studies, when no further drug(s) were administered, 5-HT release in NAcc was significantly increased above (Day 1) Fig. 1. (A) Day 1: Acute studies: Effects of cocaine (Coc) and clozapine/ cocaine (Cloz/Coc) combination on DA release in NAcc of freely moving and behaving, Sprague-Dawley Rattus norvegicus. Line graphs show acute responses for DA. Axes: x axis, predrug denotes time for baseline values for DA, postdrug denotes time after drug injection(s); y axis represents % change in DA produced by drug injection(s). Cocaine (n = 5) increased DA (P<.001). Results from administration of clozapine/cocaine combined (n = 6), show that clozapine blocked cocaine-induced DA during the 2-h time course study (P<.001). (B) Day 1: Acute studies: Effects of cocaine (Coc) and clozapine/cocaine (Cloz/Coc) combination on 5-HT release in NAcc of freely moving and behaving, Sprague-Dawley R. norvegicus. Line graphs show acute responses for 5-HT. Axes: x axis, predrug denotes time for baseline values for 5-HT, postdrug denotes time after drug injection(s); y axis represents % change in 5-HT produced by drug injection(s). Cocaine (w = 5) increased 5-HT {P <.001). Results from administration of clozapine/cocaine combined (« = 6), show that clozapine blocked cocaine-induced 5-HT release during the 2-h time course study (P <.001). (C) Day 1: Acute studies: Effects of cocaine (Coc) and clozapine/cocaine (Cloz/Coc) combination on Locomotion (Ambulations) in freely moving and behaving, Sprague-Dawley R. norvegicus. Line graphs show acute responses for locomotion. Axes: x axis, predrug denotes time for baseline values for locomotion, postdrug denotes time after drug injection(s); y axis represents change in frequency for

■ <----- ► -♦ Pre-Drug  
Post Drug Time in Minutes  
locomotion produced by drug injection(s). Cocaine (n = 5) increased locomotion over baseline (P<.001). Results from clozapine/cocaine combined (n = 6), show that clozapine blocked cocaine-induced locomotion during the 2-h time course study (P<.001).

164 P.A. Broderick et al. / Progress in Neuro-Psychopharmacology & Biological Psychiatry 28 (2004) 157—171

A  
baseline values (one-way ANOVA: P<.0001; F= 38.99; <^f=3,30), post hoc analysis showed significant differences between baseline (Day 1) and (Day 2) values (same animal control) (Tukey’s Multiple Comparison Test: P<.001, </ = 7.704). Significant differences occurred between cocaine (Day 2) and clozapine/cocaine groups (Day 2) (Tukey’s Multiple Comparison Test: P<.001, q= 14.90) (Fig. 2B). 3.6. Day 2: subacute studies: effects of cocaine or clozapine/ cocaine combination on Locomotion (ambulations) Cocaine (open circles): During the subacute studies, when no further cocaine was administered, locomotor activity on (Day 2) was significantly increased over baseline (Day 1) values (one-way ANOVA: P<.0186; F=3.843; 6//'= 3,32). Post hoc analysis showed that significant differ-

Pre-Drug Pre-Drug Pre-Drug  
24 Hrs Post Drug Time in Minutes 24 Hrs Post Drug Time in Minutes 24 Hrs Post Drug Time in Minutes  
ences occurred between baseline (Day 1) and (Day 2) values Fig. 2. (A) Day 2: Subacute studies: Effects of cocaine (Coc) and clozapine/ cocaine (Cloz/Coc) combination on DA release in NAcc of freely moving and behaving, Sprague-Dawley R. norvegicus. Line graphs show subacute responses for DA. Axes: x axis, predrug denotes time for baseline values for DA from Day 1 studies (acute), postdrug denotes time for Day 2, DA values (subacute), when no further drug was administered to drug groups (same animal control); y axis, % change in DA compared with baseline. On Day 2, in the cocaine group ( h = 5), DA decreased from baseline (P<.001), likely withdrawal related. Similarly, in the clozapine/cocaine group (n = 6), DA decreased from baseline (P<.001). There was no significant difference in DA effects between subacute cocaine and clozapine/cocaine groups (P>.05). Thus, the data suggest that DA-related cocaine withdrawal responses, subacutely, is not reversed by clozapine. (B) Day 2: Subacute studies: Effects of cocaine (Coc) and clozapine/cocaine (Cloz/Coc) combination on 5-HT release in NAcc of freely moving and behaving, Sprague-Dawley R. norvegicus. Line graphs show subacute responses for 5-HT. Axes: x axis, predrug denotes time for baseline values for 5-HT from Day 1 studies (acute), postdrug denotes time for Day 2, 5-HT values (subacute), when no further drug was administered to drug groups (same animal control); y axis, % change in 5-HT from baseline. On Day 2, in the cocaine group (n = 5), 5-HT decreased from baseline at the 15-min mark and during the second part of the 1-h time course (P< .05), likely reflecting 5-HT-related cocaine withdrawal effects. However, in the clozapine/cocaine group (n = 6), 5-HT increased above baseline (P<.001). There was a significant difference between subacute cocaine versus clozapine/cocaine groups (P<.001). The data suggest that clozapine, which has a longer pharmacokinetic half-life than does cocaine, may have reversed the 5-HTrelated withdrawal effects of cocaine. (C) Day 2: Subacute studies: Effects of cocaine (Coc) and clozapine/cocaine (Cloz/Coc) combination on locomotion (ambulation) in freely moving and behaving, Sprague-Dawley R. norvegicus. Line graphs show subacute responses for locomotion. Axes: x axis, predrug denotes time for baseline values for locomotion from Day 1 studies (acute), postdrug denotes time for Day 2, locomotor values (subacute), when no further drug was administered to drug groups (same animal control); y axis represents change in frequency of locomotor counts compared with baseline. On Day 2, in the cocaine group (n = 5), locomotion was increased over baseline values (P<.05). In the clozapine/cocaine group (« = 6), locomotor counts showed no change from (Day 1) baseline (P>.05). There was a significant difference between subacute values in the cocaine group versus the clozapine/cocaine group (P<.05). Due to clozapine’s longer lived pharmacokinetic properties, clozapine-induced sedation may be the mechanism for continued, diminished locomotion during subacute (Day 2) studies.

Frequency: Absolute O  
5-HT Release  
DA Release  
Number of Ambulations  
(% change from baseline)  
(% change from baseline)  
PA. Broderick et al. / Progress in Neuro-Psychopharmacology & Biological Psychiatry 28 (2004) 157—171 165

(same animal control) (Tukey’s Multiple Comparison Test: P<.05, 7 = 3.925). Nonetheless, locomotor activity decreased by 250 counts when compared with (Day 1) effects of cocaine-induced psychomotor stimulation. Clozapine/cocaine (closed circles): During the subacute studies, when no further cocaine or clozapine were administered, locomotor activity remained significantly decreased (one-way ANOVA: P<.0186; F= 3.843; #=3,32). Post hoc analysis showed that no significant differences occurred between baseline (Day 1) and (Day 2) values (same animal control) (Tukey’s Multiple Comparison Test: P>.05, 7 = 0.03647). Moreover, (Day 2) cocaine and clozapine/ cocaine groups did significantly differ (Tukey’s Multiple Comparison Test: P<.05, 7 = 3.846) (Fig. 2C). In all groups, additional saline controls had no effect. 4. Discussion 4.1. Cocaine, monoamines and psychomotor stimulant behavior: acute studies We have extended our work from two recent articles on the effects of cocaine on DA and 5-HT release in NAcc of freely moving and behaving laboratory rats WHILE monitoring cocaine-induced psychomotor stimulant behavior simultaneously. Comparing the present data to the first of these recent papers (Broderick et al., 2003), we have simply added animals to our cocaine group. Comparing the present data to the second of these recent papers (Broderick and Piercey, 1998b), an entirely different group of animals was utilized. The results from all three studies from our laboratory were equivalent, i.e., increased DA, 5-HT release in NAcc occurred with increased psychomotor stimulant behavior (Broderick, 2001; Broderick and Piercey, 1998b; Broderick et al., 2003). 4.2. Cocaine, monoamines and psychomotor stimulant behavior: subacute studies Cocaine studies in the subacute group were also extended by increasing the number of animals above what was used in our previous studies (Broderick et al., 2003); again, the results were equivalent. When no further drug was administered, there was a significant decrease in DA release in NAcc and significant decreases in 5-HT release during specific points in the time course data. The data are in agreement with several reports (Broderick et al., 1997; Parsons et al., 1995,1996). In addition, the data agree with a previous report showing long-lasting effects after a single moderate dose of cocaine (Zahniser et al., 1988). Behavioral activity maintained an increase at the same time that accumbens DA and 5HT release were decreased, thereby suggesting dissociative function between behavior classically known to be mediated via DA 2 postsynaptically and monoamine release and reuptake inhibitory mechanisms, presynaptically.  
The subacute data suggest that these monoamine deficiencies may be associated with symptoms of withdrawal and the data agree with clinical reports of DA-ergic systems and craving (Dackis and Gold, 1985; Gawin and Kleber, 1986a,b; Lieberman et al., 1990; Margolin et al., 1995). Neuroadaptation may be occurring as reported in animal studies (Broderick, 2001; Koob and Nestler, 1997) because neither the short pharmacokinetic half-life of cocaine nor that of its metabolites, provides a rational explanation (Misra et al., 1974a,b; Nayak et al., 1976; Mets et al., 1999; Sun and Lau, 2001). Of course, another plausible explanation though, is one provided by others, that transient compensatory changes take place a day after cocaine cessation (Zahniser et al., 1988). 4.3. Cocaine, monoamine interactions, possible mechanisms Classical cocaine mechanisms point to a postsynaptic DA 2 release with additional DA release derived presynaptically from DA somatodendrites, VTA. Current thinking on the mechanism of action of cocaine points to a DA/5HT interaction in DA mesolimbic circuits. A postsynaptic 5-HT-ergic up-modulation of DA in NAcc has been implicated; the 5-HT 2A/2C receptor has been shown to upmodulate DA release in NAcc after intermittent cocaine (Yan et al., 2000) and endogenously, as well (Yan, 2000). Local application (infusion) of [(± )-2,5-dimethoxy-4iodoamphetamine hydrochloride] (DOI), a 5-HT 2A /2c agonist, was infused into NAcc to increase DA which was subsequently blocked by ketanserin, a 5-HT 2A/2C antagonist. Furthermore, infusion of DOI in NAcc was antagonized by the selective 5-HT 2C / 2 b receptor antagonist, SB 206553, but not by the selective 5-HT 2 a antagonist, SR 46349B (Lucas and Spampinato, 2000), suggesting that DA increases in NAcc after infusion of DOI may be due to a mediation by the 5-HT 2 c receptor. However, prematurely pointing specifically to the 5HT 2 c receptor for cocaine’s mechanism of action may present a limitation because local application (infusion into NAcc) of 5-HT 2 c receptor agonists did not alter basal locomotor activity nor mimic the stimulus effects of cocaine (Filip and Cunningham, 2002; McMahon et al., 2001). Also, a recent report shows that a 5-HT 2A receptor mediation is prominent in blocking cocaine-induced locomotor activity (McMahon and Cunningham, 2001). Therefore, the mechanism of action of cocaine is probably dually directed, i.e., via classical DA 2 and currently explored 5-HT 2A/2C /DA 2 receptor circuits. Although studies by Di Matteo et al. (1999), do not address cocaine, the data do importantly show the direct autoreceptor properties of selective 5-HT 2C receptor compounds vis-a-vis the effects of these compounds when locally applied by infusion. Thus, the selective 5-HT 2C antagonist, SB 242084, increased and the selective 5HT 2 c agonist, RO 60-0175, decreased DA release in NAcc (Di Matteo et al., 1999).

166 PA. Broderick et al. / Progress in Neuro-Psychopharmacology & Biological Psychiatry 28 (2004) 157—171

4.4. Clozapine/cocaine: acute studies Clozapine significantly reduced cocaine-induced increases in DA release in NAcc by an average of 40% in the first hour of study and 50% in the second hour of study. Simultaneously, clozapine significantly reduced cocaine-induced increases in 5-HT release in NAcc by an average of 138% in the first hour of study and average of 113% in the second hour of study. Also, at the same time, locomotor activity (ambulation counts) produced by cocaine, were reduced by an average of 500 counts in the first half hour and by an average of 150 counts in the next hour of study. Since these are the first studies of this kind ever performed, direct comparisons cannot be made. Nonetheless, the present studies are in general agreement with preclinical studies in which clozapine was shown to antagonize cocaine-induced place preference in animals (Kosten and Nestler, 1994) and to block reinforcement by intravenous cocaine in animals (Loh et al., 1992). 4.5. Clozapine/cocaine: possible mechanisms of action: acute studies The data suggest that increased 5-HT by cocaine leads to an increase in DA release perhaps via either a separate or combined 5-HT 2A /2c receptor mediation, which is subsequently blocked by clozapine. This suggestion is made because of previous reports of the importance of 5-HT 2 a /2 c receptors either alone or combined in cocaine mechanisms (Filip and Cunningham, 2002; McMahon and Cunningham, 2001; Yan, 2000; Yan et al., 2000) and because clozapine is, in fact, the prototypical atypical 5HT 2 a /DA 2 receptor antagonist, although not exclusively bound to these two types of receptors. Clozapine has high antagonist affinity for the 5-HT 2C receptor and indeed, phosphoinositol inverse agonist activity at the 5-HT 2C receptor (Herrick-Davis et al., 1999, 2000; Kuoppamaki et al., 1995) has been shown specifically in NAcc, in the action of clozapine (Di Matteo et al., 2002). Classical DA 2 postsynaptic antagonism of cocaine-induced psychomotor stimulant behavior by clozapine probably accounts, at least in part, for the complete blockade of motor activity observed. Interestingly, in the apomorphine-induced hypomotility test, clozapine did not antagonize this presynaptic response, unlike the DA 2/3 antipsychotic agent, sulpiride (Robertson and MacDonald, 1986). A mediation by 5-HT 2A /2c receptors in the mechanism of action for clozapine’s blockade of cocaine, is also further suggested. In acute studies performed in this laboratory, we substituted (3 mg/kg sc) ketanserin, a 5-HT 2A /2c antagonist, for clozapine and the results were remarkably similar to clozapine in blocking cocaine-induced monoamine release and psychomotor stimulant behavior, although ketanserin blockade of cocaine was actually weaker than that of clozapine in all three parameters studied (Broderick et al., 2001).  
Ketanserin and clozapine do not have similar receptor profiles, in general, but ketanserin is similar to clozapine in that both are direct receptor antagonists which bind with high affinity to 5-HT 2A , 5-HT 2C , adrenergic (cti) and histamine (HJ receptors; ketanserin does not have bind to DA receptors (Duffy et al., 2000; Lutje Hulsik, 2002). The strong ct | influence is a concern, but there is good evidence that only 5-HT 2A /2c receptors are involved and ct) adrenoreceptors are not involved in the mechanism of cocaine’s stimulant activity (Filip et al., 2001). The high antagonist affinity for Hi receptors on the part of both ketanserin and clozapine, is probably not a concern. Studies on H! and even H 2 promoter polymorphisms conclude that participation of these receptors have an unlikely influence in the clinical response to clozapine treatment (Mancama et al., 2002) . Thus, 5-HT 2A /2 c properties for clozapine are highly likely mechanisms for clozapine’s antagonism of cocaine effects. It is interesting that studies on risperidone’s effects on cocaine-induced stimulant monoamine neurochemistry and locomotor behavior, showed that risperidone completely blocked 5-HT release in NAcc and simultaneous locomotor activity but did not completely block DA release on NAcc. Indeed, risperidone significantly increased DA release in the second hour of the study, given the caveat that high dose risperidone (2 mg/kg sc) was tested (Broderick et al., 2003) . 4.6. Clozapine/cocaine: subacute studies Results showed that DA release in NAcc, at this time, decreased by an average of 60% during the hour of study, while 5-HT release increased by 50% above baseline for the hour of study and locomotor activity remained reduced by an average of 250 ambulatory counts in the first 20 min. It is important to note that these long lasting effects of clozapine are supported by pharmacokinetics. The half-life of clozapine is 8 h at lower doses and 4-66 h at higher doses; the hydroxlated and N-oxide derivatives are reported to be inactive (Clinical Pharmacology of Clozapine, 2002). Interestingly, preliminary data from our laboratory have shown that significantly increased 5-HT release after combined clozapine/cocaine administration, does not begin to diminish until the fifth day of recovery after drug administration. 4.7. Clozapine/cocaine: possible mechanisms of action: subacute studies The occurrence of increased 5-HT release in subacute studies may be explained by clozapine’s mechanism than by cocaine’s mechanism. If we look at clozapine, 5-HT presynaptic autoreceptors, as studied in synaptosomes, may lend an explanatory note (Drescher and Hetey, 1988). Also, presumably by autoreceptors, clozapine increased DA efflux in NAcc (Kuroki et al., 1999; Volonte et al., 1997), DA and

PA. Broderick et al. / Progress in Neuro-Psychopharmacology & Biological Psychiatry 28 (2004) 157—171 167

5-HT release in NAcc in the behaving animal (Broderick et al., unpublished data; Ichikawa et al., 1998) and DA and 5HT release in NAcc in the anesthetized animal (Broderick and Piercey, 1998a). Therefore, increased 5-HT release, as shown in these subacute studies, may be mediated by inhibitory presynaptic autoreceptors. The explanation for decreased DA release is not apparent, unless this DA decrease is simply compensatory (Beart and McDonald, 1982; Herve et al., 1979). Moreover, increased 5-HT release on the second day of study might possibly have been derived from increased cocaine serum levels due to the longer lasting effects of clozapine since a clinical study reported enhanced cocaine serum levels after administration of both clozapine and cocaine to cocaine addicts (Farren et al., 2000). It is noteworthy that increased 5-HT release on the second day of study, did not occur in a risperidone/cocaine group (Broderick et al., 2003). Thus far, research in our laboratory suggests that clozapine’s action on cocaine is mediated at least partly, via 5HT 2A /2C receptors because the results presented here, from clozapine/cocaine combination studies, resemble those obtained during subacute studies when substituting the 5HT 2 a /2 c antagonist, ketanserin for clozapine. In subacute studies with ketanserin/cocaine, when no further ketanserin or cocaine was administered, DA release in NAcc decreased and 5-HT increased to a statistically significant level, just as did results, subacutely, in the clozapine/cocaine group. There were some differences in monoamine reactions during the subacute studies between the ketanserin/cocaine group and the clozapine/cocaine group, e.g., the DA response was weaker and the 5-HT response was somewhat stronger. Notably, locomotor activity was significantly higher on the second day for the ketanserin/cocaine group vis-a-vis the clozapine/cocaine group. The clozapine/cocaine group continued to exhibit sedation, possibly through residual potent, muscarinic anticholinergic receptor mediation (Richelson and Souder, 2000; Broderick et al., 2001). On the other hand, the atypical antipsychotic medication, the 5-HT 2A /DA 2 receptor antagonist, risperidone, did not exhibit subacute responses to cocaine as did clozapine. In fact, DA and 5-HT release returned to baseline and locomotor activity increased insignificantly above baseline (Broderick et al., 2003). It is noteworthy however, that studies with the high dose of risperidone (2 mg/kg sc) were performed (Broderick et al., 2003). High dose risperidone exhibits more typical than atypical antipsychotic properties (Williams, 2001). Not to be neglected, though, is a possible mediation by the 5-HT i A receptor because clozapine exhibits moderate receptor binding for the 5-HT iA receptor (Schotte et al., 1993, 1996; Sumiyoshi et al., 1995). Importantly, the 5HT 1 a receptor has been shown clinically to mediate schizophrenic psychosis (Chou et al., 2003) and preclinically, to mediate the action of DA in NAcc (Ichikawa and Meltzer, 2000). Finally, cti antagonism has been shown to mediate  
inhibition of dorsal raphe (DR) firing by clozapine through 5-HT 1A receptors (Sprouse et al., 1999). 5. Conclusions Acute studies showed that clozapine blocked accumbens DA, 5-HT and locomotor effects of cocaine. These studies are the first of their kind. The subacute studies are also unique; the subacute studies allowed us to study withdrawal effects of cocaine in addition to the unexpected long-lasting effects of clozapine/cocaine treatment on accumbens DA and 5-HT release in the freely moving and behaving animal. Enhanced 5-HT release may help alleviate clinical depression associated with cocaine withdrawal (Price et al., 2001), although decreased DA release could be a disadvantage, possibly leading to craving (Dackis and Gold, 1985). Nonetheless, critical treatment strategies for cocaine addiction and psychosis could be derived from these results. Acknowledgements The authors gratefully acknowledge the support of the National Institute of Health, NIH/NIGMS SCORE AWARD # SO 6 GM 08168 to Patricia A. Broderick, PhD. Partial support from Professional Staff Congress/The City University of New York (PSC/CUNY), RF # 64282-00-33 is also gratefully acknowledged. The authors thank Nicholas Mjavia, DVM, MS and Charmenese Worrell, BS candidate, for laboratory research assistance and Bridget T. O’Sullivan, OP, MA, for secretarial assistance working with a vast amount of detailed references for this manuscript. References Beart, P.M., McDonald, D., 1982. 5-Hydroxytryptamine and 5-hydroxytryptaminergic-dopaminergic interactions in the ventral tegmental area of rat brain. J. Pharm. Pharmacol. 34, 591-593. Bradberry, C.W., Roth, R.H., 1989. Cocaine increases extracellular dopamine in rat nucleus accumbens and ventral tegmental area as shown by in vivo microdialysis. Neurosci. Lett. 103, 97-102. Bradberry, C.W., Nobiletti, J.B., Elsworth, J.D., Murphy, B., Jatlow, R, Roth, R.H., 1993. Cocaine and cocaethylene: microdialysis comparison of brain drug levels and effects on dopamine and serotonin. J. Neurochem. 60, 1429-1435. Brady, K.T., Lydiard, R.B., Malcolm, R., Ballenger, J.C., 1991. Cocaineinduced psychosis. J. Clin. Psychiatry 52, 509-512. Broderick, P.A., 1987. Striatal neurochemistry of dynorphin-(l-13): in vivo electrochemical semidifferential analyses. Neuropeptides 10, 369-386. Broderick, P.A., 1988. Distinguishing in vitro electrochemical signatures for norepinephrine and dopamine. Neurosci. Lett. 95, 275-280. Broderick, P.A., 1989. Characterizing stearate probes in vitro for the electrochemical detection of dopamine and serotonin. Brain Res. 495, 115-121. Broderick, P.A., 1990. State-of-the-art microelectrodes for in vivo voltammetry. Electroanalysis 2, 241-251. Broderick, P.A., 1991a. Cocaine: on-line analysis of an accumbens amine

168 PA. Broderick et al. / Progress in Neuro-Psychopharmacology & Biological Psychiatry 28 (2004) 157—171

neuronal basis for psychomotor behavior. Pharmacol. Biochem. Behav. 40, 959-968. Broderick, P.A., 1991b. In vivo voltammetric studies on release mechanisms for cocaine with y-butyrolactone. Pharmacol. Biochem. Behav. 40, 969-975. Broderick, P.A., 1992a. Cocaine’s colocalized effects on synaptic serotonin and dopamine in ventral tegmentum in a reinforcement paradigm. Pharmacol. Biochem. Behav. 42, 889-898. Broderick, P.A., 1992b. Distinguishing effects of cocaine (IV) and (SC) on mesoaccumbens dopamine and serotonin release with chloral hydrate anesthesia. Pharmacol. Biochem. Behav. 43, 929-937. Broderick, P.A., 1999. Microelectrodes and their use in an electrochemical arrangement with telemetric application. U.S. Patent # 5, 938, 903. Representative of approximately 20 patents and trademarks. Broderick, P.A., 2001. Microsensors detect cocaine neuroadaptation: serotonin release within basal ganglia is not rhythmic with movement. In: Massaro, E.J., Schardein, J.L., Broderick, P.A., Schlaepfer, T.E., Mattsson, J.L. (Eds.), Handbook of Neurotoxicology, vol. 2. Humana Press, Totowa, NJ, pp. 323-367. Broderick, P.A., 2002. Interleukin la alters hippocampal serotonin and norepinephrine release during open-field behavior in SpragueDawley animals: differences from the Fawn-Hooded animal model of depression. Prog. Neuro-Psychopharmacol. Biol. Psychiatry 26, 1355-1372. Broderick, P.A., Pacia, S.V., 2003. Identification, diagnosis and treatment of neuropathologies, neurotoxicities, tumors, and brain and spinal cord injuries using microelectrodes with microvoltammetry. U.S. Patent #PCT/US02/11244. Broderick, P.A., Phelix, C.F., 1997. I. Serotonin (5-HT) within dopamine reward circuits signals open-field behavior: II. Basis of 5-HT-DA interaction in cocaine dysfunctional behavior. Neurosci. Biobehav. Rev. 21 (3), 227-260. Broderick, P.A., Piercey, M.F., 1998a. Clozapine, haloperidol, and the D 4 antagonist, PNU-101387G: in vivo effects on mesocortical, mesolimbic, and nigrostriatal dopamine and serotonin release. J. Neural Transm. 105, 749-767. Broderick, P.A., Piercey, M.F., 1998b. Neurochemical and behavioral evidence supporting (+)-AJ 76 as a potential pharmacotherapy for cocaine abuse. J. Neural Transm. 105, 1307-1324. Broderick, P.A., Komak, E.P., Eng, F., Wechsler, R.W., 1993. Real time detection of acute (IP) cocaine-enhanced dopamine and serotonin release in ventrolateral nucleus accumbens of the behaving Norway rat. Pharmacol. Biochem. Behav. 46, 715-722. Broderick, P.A., Penn Erskine, C., Charleton, H., Green, S., Okonji, C., 1997. A four week follow-up study of serotonin (5-HT) and dopamine (DA) release in nucleus accumbens of animals behaving in an openfield paradigm, after acute cocaine administration. Soc. Neurosci. Abstr. 23, 1867. Broderick, P.A., Pacia, S.V., Doyle, W.K., Devinsky, O., 2000. Monoamine neurotransmitters in resected hippocampal subparcellations from neocortical and mesial temporal lobe epilepsy patients: in situ microvoltammetric studies. Brain Res. 878, 49-63. Broderick, P.A., Nigro, J.P., Olabisi, O.A., 2001. 5-HT 2 a antagonist attenuation of cocaine-induced serotonin (5-HT) and dopamine (DA) release in nucleus accumbens (NAcc) during open-field behavior: in vivo microvoltammetric studies using ketanserin. Soc. Neurosci. Abstr. 27, 405. Broderick, P.A., Rahni, D.N., Zhou, Y., 2003. Acute and subacute effects of risperidone and cocaine on accumbens dopamine and serotonin release using in vivo microvoltammetry on line with open-field behavior. Prog. Neuro-Psychopharmacol. Biol. Psychiatry 27 (6), 1037-1054. Brown, E.E., Finlay, J.M., Wong, J.T., Damsma, G., Fibiger, H.C., 1991. Behavioral and neurochemical interactions between cocaine and buprenorphine: implications for the pharmacology of cocaine abuse. J. Pharmacol. Exp. Ther. 256, 119-126. Brunello, N., Masotto, C., Steardo, L., Markstein, R., Racagni, G., 1995. New insights into the biology of schizophrenia through the mecha-  
nism of action of clozapine. Neuropsychopharmacology 13 (3), 177-213. Buckley, P.F., 1998. Substance abuse in schizophrenia: a review. J. Clin. Psychiatry 59 (Suppl. 3), S26-S30. Carroll, M.E., Lac, S.T., Asencio, M., Kragh, R., 1990a. Intravenous cocaine self-administration in rats is reduced by dietary L-tryptophan. Psychopharmacology (Berl.) 100, 293-300. Carroll, M.E., Lac, S.T., Asencio, M., Kragh, R., 1990b. Fluoxetine reduces intravenous cocaine self-administration in rats. Pharmacol. Biochem. Behav. 35, 237-244. Carroll, F.I., Gray, J.L., Abraham, P., Kuzemko, M.A., Lewin, A.H., Boja, J.W., Kuhar, M.J., 1993. 3-Aryl-2-(3' -substituted-1' ,2' ,4' -oxadiazol5' -yl) tropane analogues of cocaine: affinities at the cocaine binding site at the dopamine, serotonin and norepinephrine transporters. J. Med. Chem. 36, 2886-2890. Chen, N.H., Reith, M.E., 1993. 3[H] dopamine and [3H] serotonin release in vitro induced by electrical stimulation in A9 and A10 dopamine regions of rat brain: characterization and responses to cocaine. J. Pharmacol. Exp. Ther. 267 (1), 379-389. Chou, Y.H., Halldin, C., Farde, L., 2003. Occupancy of 5-HT(lA) receptors by clozapine in the primate brain: a PET study. Psychopharmacology (Berl.) 166 (3), 234-240. Clinical Pharmacology of Clozapine, 2002. Rx List of Monographs. Cools, A.R., van Rossum, J.M., 1970. Caudal dopamine and stereotype behaviour of cats. Arch. Int. Pharmacodyn. 187, 163-173. Costall, B., Naylor, R.J., 1973. The role of telencephalic dopaminergic systems in the mediation of apomorphine-stereotyped behaviour. Eur. J. Pharmacol. 24, 8-24. Costall, B., Naylor, R.J., Pycock, C., 1976. Non-specific supersensitivity of striatal dopamine receptors after 6-hydroxydopamine lesions of the nigrostriatal pathway. Eur. J. Pharmacol. 35, 275-283. Costall, B., Domeney, A.M., Naylor, R.J., 1990. 5-HT 3 receptor antagonists attenuate dopamine-induced hyperactivity in the rat. NeuroReport 1, 77-80. Cunningham, K.A., Lakoski, J.M., 1988. Electrophysiological effects of cocaine and procaine on dorsal raphe serotonin neurons. Eur. J. Pharmacol. 148, 457-462. Dackis, C.A., Gold, M.S., 1985. New concepts in cocaine addiction: the dopamine depletion hypothesis. Neurosci. Biobehav. Rev. 9 (3), 469-477. De La Garza II, R., Cunningham, K.A. 2000. The effects of the 5-hydroxytryptamine (1A) agonist 8-hydroxy-2-(di-n-propylamino) tetralin on spontaneous activity, cocaine-induced hyperactivity and behavioral sensitization: a microanalysis of locomotor activity. J. Pharmacol. Exp. Ther. 292 (2), 610-617. Delfs, J.M., Schreiber, L., Kelley, A.E., 1990. Micro injection of cocaine into the nucleus accumbens elicits locomotor activation in the rat. J. Neurosci. 10 (1), 303-310. de Wit, H., Wise, R.A., 1977. Blockade of cocaine reinforcement in rats with the dopamine receptor blocker pimozide but not with the noradrenergic blockers, phentolamine or phenoxybenzamine. Can. J. Psychol. 31, 195-203. Di Matteo, V., Di Giovanni, G., Di Mascio, M., Esposito, E., 1999. SB 242084, a selective serotonin 2c receptor antagonist, increases dopaminergic transmission in the mesolimbic system. Neuropharmacology 38, 1195-1205. Di Matteo, V., Cacchio, M., Di Giulio, C., Di Giovanni, G., Esposito, E., 2002. Biochemical evidence that the atypical antipsychotic drugs clozapine and risperidone block 5-HT 2c receptors in vivo. Pharmacol. Biochem. Behav. 71, 607-613. Drescher, K., Hetey, L., 1988. Influence of antipsychotics and serotonin antagonists on presynaptic receptors modulating the release of serotonin in synaptosomes of the nucleus accumbens of rats. Neuropharmacology 27 (1), 31-36. Duffy, R.A., Hunt, M.A., Wamsley, J.K., McQuade, R.D., 2000. In vivo autoradiography of [3H] SCH 39166 in rat brain: selective displacement by D1/D5 antagonists. J. Chem. Neuroanat. 19 (1), 41-46.

PA. Broderick et al. / Progress in Neuro-Psychopharmacology & Biological Psychiatry 28 (2004) 157—171 169

Einhorn, L.C., Johnsen, P.A., White, F.J., 1988. Electrophysiological effects of cocaine in the mesoaccumbens dopamine system: studies in the ventral tegmental area. J. Neurosci. 8, 100-112. Farren, C.K., Hameedi, F.A., Rosen, M.A., Woods, S., Jatlow, P., Kosten, T.R., 2000. Significant interaction between clozapine and cocaine in cocaine addicts. Drug Alcohol Depend. 59 (2), 153-163. Filip, M., Cunningham, K.A., 2002. Serotonin 5-HT(2C) receptors in nucleus accumbens regulate expression of hyperlocomotive and discriminate stimulus effects of cocaine. Pharmacol. Biochem. Behav. 21 (19), 7781-7787. Filip, M., Nowak, E., Papia, I., 2001. On the role of serotonin 2A/2C receptors in the sensitization to cocaine. J. Physiol. Pharmacol. 52 (3), 471-481. Fischman, M.W., 1984. The behavioral pharmacology of cocaine in humans. NIDA Res. Monogr. 50, 72-91. Foucault, R., Broderick, P.A., Rahni, D.N., Lombardi, J.R., Birke, R.L., 2002. Neurotransmitter signatures: a correlation between Raman spectroscopy and microvoltammetric BRODERICK PROBES®. NIH/ NIGMS Conference and Abstract, New Orleans, LA. Frank, R.A., Tsibulsky, V., Grocki, S., Dashevsky, B., Kehne, J.H., Schmidt, C.J., Sorensen, S.M., 1995. Mixed D 2 /5-HT 2 antagonism of amphetamine-induced facilitation of brain stimulation reward. Pharmacol. Biochem. Behav. 52, 799-804. Galloway, M.P., 1990. Regulation of dopamine and serotonin synthesis by acute administration of cocaine. Synapse 6, 63-72. Gawin, F., Kleber, H., 1986a. Pharmacological treatments of cocaine abuse. (Review). Psychiatr. Clin. North Am. 9, 573-583. Gawin, F.H., Kleber, H.D., 1986b. Abstinence symptomatology and psychiatric diagnosis in cocaine abusers. Clinical observations. Arch. Gen. Psychiatry 43, 104-113. Gawin, F.H., Allen, D., Humblestone, B., 1989. Outpatient treatment of “crack” cocaine smoking with flupenthixol decanoate. A preliminary report. Arch Gen Psychiatry 46, 322-325. Glazer, W.M., 2000. Extrapyramidal side effects, tardive dyskinesia, and the concept of atypicality. J. Clin. Psychiatry 61 (Suppl. 3), S16-S21. Hall, F.S., Li, X.F., Sora, I., Xu, F., Caron, M., Lesch, K.P., Murphy, D.L., Uhl, G.R., 2002. Cocaine mechanisms: enhanced cocaine, fluoxetine and nisoxetine place preferences following monoamine transporter deletions. Neuroscience 115 (1), 153-161. Harris, D., Batki, S.L., 2000. Stimulant psychosis: symptom profile and acute clinical course. Am. J. Addict. 9 (1), 28-37. Hernandez, L., Hoebel, B.G., 1988. Food reward and cocaine increases extracellular dopamine in the nucleus accumbens as measured by microdialysis. Life Sci. 42, 1705-1712. Herrick-Davis, K., Grinde, E., Niswender, C.M., 1999. Serotonin 2c receptor RNA editing alters receptor basal activity: implications for serotonergic signal transduction. J. Neurochem. 73, 1711-1717. Herrick-Davis, K., Grinde, E., Teitler, M., 2000. Inverse agonist activity of atypical antipsychotic drugs at human 5-hydroxytryptamine 2c receptors. J. Pharmacol. Exp. Ther. 295, 226-232. Herve, D., Simon, H., Blanc, G., Lisoprawski, A., LeMoal, M., Glowinski, J., Tassin, J.P., 1979. Increased utilization of dopamine in the nucleus accumbens but not in the cerebral cortex after dorsal raphe lesion in the rat. Neurosci. Lett. 15, 127-133. Herve, D., Pickel, V.M., Joh, T.H., Beaudet, A., 1987. Serotonin axon terminals in the ventral tegmental area of the rat: fine structure and synaptic input to dopaminergic neurons. Brain Res. 435, 71-83. Hillegaart, V., Wadenberg, M.L., Ahlenius, S., 1989. Effects of 8-OHDPAT on motor activity in the rat. Pharmacol. Biochem. Behav. 32, 797-800. Hope, O., Lineen, E., Okonji, C., Green, S., Saleem, A., Aulakh, C.S., Broderick, P.A., 1995. Cocaine has remarkable nucleus accumbens effects on line, with behavior in the serotonin-deficient Fawn Hooded rat. NIH/NIGMS Symposium, Washington, DC. Ichikawa, J., Meltzer, H.Y., 2000. The effect of serotonini A receptor agonism on antipsychotic drug-induced dopamine release in rat striatum and nucleus accumbens. Brain Res. 858 (2), 252-263.  
Ichikawa, J., Kuroki, T., Dai, J., Meltzer, H.Y., 1998. Effect of antipsychotic drugs on extracellular serotonin levels in rat medial prefrontal cortex and nucleus accumbens. Eur. J. Pharmacol. 351 (2), 163-171. Izenwasser, S., Wesling, L.L., Cox, B.M., 1990. Comparison of the effects of cocaine and other inhibitors of dopamine uptake in rat striatum nucleus accumbens, olfactory tubercle and medial prefrontal cortex. Brain Res. 520, 303-309. Kalivas, P.W., 1993. Neurotransmitter regulation of dopamine neurons in the ventral tegmental area. Brain Res. Rev. 18, 75-113. Kalivas, P.W., Duffy, P., 1990. Effect of acute and daily cocaine treatment on extracellular dopamine in the nucleus accumbens. Synapse 5, 48-58. Kalivas, P.W., Nemeroff, C.B., 1988. The mesocorticolimbic dopamine system. New York Academy of Sciences, New York. Kane, J., Honigfeld, G., Singer, J., Meltzer, H., 1988. The Clozaril Collaborative Study Group. Clozapine for the treatment-resistant schizophrenic: a double-blind comparison versus chlorpromazine/benztropine. Arch. Gen. Psychiatry 45, 789-796. Kapur, S., Remington, G., 2001. Atypical antipsychotics: new directions and new challenges in the treatment of schizophrenia. Annu. Rev. Med. 52, 503-517. Kelly, P.H., Seviour, P., Iversen, S.D., 1975. Amphetamine and apomorphine responses in the rat following 6-OHDA lesions of the nucleus accumbens septi and corpus striatum. Brain Res. 94, 507-522. Koe, B.K., 1976. Molecular geometry of inhibitors of the uptake of catecholamines and serotonin in synaptosomal preparations of rat brain. J. Pharmacol. Exp. Ther. 199, 649-661. Koob, G.F., Nestler, E.J., 1997. The neurobiology of drug addiction. J. Neuropsychiatry Clin. Neurosci. 9, 482-497. Kosten, T.A., Nestler, E.J., 1994. Clozapine attenuates cocaine conditioned place preference. Life Sci. 55 (1), PL9-PL14. Kruzich, P.J., See, R.E., 2000. An evaluation of the role of 5-HT(2) receptor antagonism during subchronic antipsychotic drug administration in rats. Brain Res. 875 (1-2), 35-43. Kuoppamaki, M., Palvimak, E.P., Hietala, J., Syvalahti, E., 1995. Differential regulation of rat 5-HT2A and 5-HT2C receptors, a chronic treatment with clozapine, chlorpromazine and three putative atypical antipsychotic drugs. Neuropsychopharmacology 13 (2), 139-150. Kuroki, T., Meltzer, H.Y., Ichikawa, J., 1999. Effect of antipsychotic drugs on extracellular dopamine levels in rat medial prefrontal cortex and nucleus accumbens. J. Pharmacol. Exp. Ther. 288, 774-781. Lieberman, J., Johns, C., Cooper, T., Pollack, S., Kane, J., 1989. Clozapine pharmacology and tardive dyskinesia. Psychopharmacology (Berl.) 99, S54-S59 (Supplement). Lieberman, J.A., Kinon, B.J., Loebel, A.D., 1990. Dopaminergic mechanisms in idiopathic and drug-induced psychoses. Schizophr. Bull. 16 (1), 97-110. Loh, E.A., Roberts, D.C., 1990. Breakpoints on a progressive-ratio schedule reinforced by intravenous cocaine increase following depletion of forebrain serotonin. Psychopharmacology 101, 262-266. Loh, E.A., Fitch, T., Vickers, G., Roberts, D.C., 1992. Clozapine increases breaking points on a progressive-ratio schedule reinforced by intravenous cocaine. Pharmacol. Biochem. Behav. 42 (3), 559-562. Lucas, G., Spampinato, U., 2000. Role of striatal serotonin 2A and serotonin 2C receptor subtypes in the control of in vivo dopamine outflow in the rat striatum. J. Neurochem. 74, 693-701. Lutje Hulsik, D., 2002. Functional and binding data for ketanserin. Organon. Lysaker, P., Bell, M., Beam-Goulet, J., Milstein, R., 1994. Relationship of positive and negative symptoms to cocaine abuse in schizophrenia. J. Nerv. Ment. Dis. 182 (2), 109-112. Mancama, D., Arranz, M.J., Munro, J., Osborne, S., Makoff, A., Collier, D., Kerwin, R., 2002. Investigation of promoter variants of the histamine 1 and 2 receptors in schizophrenia and clozapine response. Neurosci. Lett. 333 (3), 207-211. Margolin, A., Avants, S.K., Kosten, T.R., 1995. Mazindol for relapse prevention to cocaine abuse in methadone-maintained patients. Am. J. Drug Alcohol Abuse 21 (4), 469-481. McGregor, A., Lacosta, S., Roberts, D.C.S., 1993. L-Tryptophan decreases

170 PA. Broderick et al. / Progress in Neuro-Psychopharmacology & Biological Psychiatry 28 (2004) 157—171

the breaking point under a progressive ratio schedule of intravenous cocaine self-administration in the rat. Pharmacol. Biochem. Behav. 45, 651-655. McKinney, W.T., 1989. Basis of development of animal models in psychiatry: an overview. In: Koob, G.F., Elhers, C.L., Kupfer, D.J. (Eds.), Animal Models of Depression. Birkhauser Press, Boston, MA, pp. 3-17. McMahon, L.R., Cunningham, K.A., 2001. Antagonism of 5-hydroxytiyptamine (2A) receptors attenuates the behavioral effects of cocaine in rats. J. Pharmacol. Exp. Ther. 297 (1), 357-363. McMahon, L.R., Filip, M., Cunningham, K.A., 2001. Differential regulation of the mesoaccumbens circuit by serotonin 5-hydroxytryptamine (5-HT)2A and (5-HT)2C receptors. J. Neurosci. 21 (19), 7781-7787. Meltzer, H.Y., 1989. Clinical studies on the mechanism of action of clozapine: the dopamine-serotonin hypothesis of schizophrenia. Psychopharmacology 99, 518-527. Meltzer, H.Y., 1991. The mechanism of action of novel antipsychotic drugs. Schizophr. Bull. 17, 263-287. Meltzer, H.Y., 1992. Dimensions of outcome with clozapine. Br. J. Psychiatry 160 (Suppl. 17), S46-S53. Meltzer, H.Y., 1999. The role of serotonin in antipsychotic drug action. Neuropsychopharmacology 21, SI06-SI 15 (Supplement). Meltzer, H.Y., Nash, J.F., 1991. Effects of antipsychotic drugs on serotonin receptors. Pharmacol. Rev. 43, 587-604. Meltzer, H.Y., Zhang, Y., Stockmeior, C.A., 1992. Effect of amperozide on rat cortical 5-HT 2 and striatal and limbic dopamine D 2 receptor occupancy: implications for antipsychotic action. Eur. J. Pharmacol. 216, 67-71. Mendoza, R., Miller, B.L., Mena, I., 1992. Emergency room evaluation of cocaine-associated neuropsychiatric disorders. Recent Dev. Alcohol 10, 73-87. Mets, B., Diaz, J., Soo, E., Jamdar, S., 1999. Cocaine, norcocaine, ecgonine methylester and benzoylecgonine pharmacokinetics in the rat. Life Sci. 65 (12), 1317-1328. Miller, B.L., Mena, I., Giombetti, R., Villanueve-Meyer, J., Djenderedjian, A.H., 1992. Neuropsychiatric effects of cocaine: SPECT Measurements. J. Addict. Dis. 11, 47-58. Misra, A.L., Nayak, P.K., Patel, M.N., Vadlamani, N.I., Mule, S.J., 1974a. Identification of norcocaine as a metabolite of (3H)-cocaine in rat brain. Experientia 30 (11), 1312-1314. Misra, A.L., Vadlamani, N.I., Bloch, R., Nayak, P.K., Mule, S.J., 1974b. Physiologic disposition and metabolism of (3H) ecgonine (cocaine metabolite) in the rat. Res. Commun. Chem. Pathol. Pharmacol. 8 (1), 55-63. Mitchell, J., Vierkant, A.D., 1991. Delusions and hallucinations of cocaine abusers and paranoid schizophrenics: a comparative study. J. Psychol. 125 (3), 301-310. Moser, P.C., Morgan, P.M., Frank, R.A., Kehne, J.H., 1995. Reversal of amphetamine-induced behaviors by MDL 100,907, a selective 5-HT 2A antagonist. Behav. Brain Res. 73, 163-167. Mueser, K.T., Nishith, P., Tracy, H., De Girolamo, J., Molinaro, M., 1995. Expectations and motives for substance use in schizophrenia. Schizophr. Bull. 21 (3), 367-378. Nambudin, D.E., Young, R.C., 1991. A case of late-onset crack dependence and subsequent psychosis in the elderly. J. Subst. Abuse Treat. 8, 253-255. Nayak, P.K., Misra, A.L., Mule, S.J., 1976. Physiological disposition and biotransformation of (3H) cocaine in acutely and chronically treated rats. J. Pharmacol. Exp. Ther. 196 (3), 556-569. Ng, J.P., Hubert, G.W., Justice Jr., J.B. 1991. Increased stimulated release and uptake of dopamine in nucleus accumbens after repeated cocaine administration as measured by in vivo voltammetry. J. Neurochem. 56, 1485-1492. Pan, Z.Z., William, J.T., 1989. Differential actions of cocaine and amphetamine on dorsal raphe neurons in vitro. J. Pharmacol. Exp. Ther. 251, 56-62.  
Parsa, M., Ramirez, L.F., Loula, E.C., Meltzer, H.Y., 1991. Effect of clozapine on psychotic depression and parkinsonism. J. Clin. Psychopharmacol. 11, 330-331. Parsons, L.H., Justice, J.B., 1993. Serotonin and dopamine sensitization in the nucleus accumbens, ventral tegmental area and dorsal raphe nucleus following repeated cocaine administration. J. Neurochem. 61, 1611-1619. Parsons, L.H., Koob, G.F., Weiss, F., 1995. Serotonin dysfunction in the nucleus accumbens of rats during withdrawal after unlimited access to intravenous cocaine. J. Pharmacol. Exp. Ther. 274, 1182-1191. Parsons, L.H., Koob, G.F., Weiss, F., 1996. Extracellular serotonin is decreased in the nucleus accumbens during withdrawal from cocaine selfadministration. Behav. Brain Res. 73 (1-2), 225-228. Pellegrino, L.J., Pellegrino, A.S., Cushman, A.J., 1979. A stereotaxic atlas of the rat brain. Plenum, New York. Peltier, R.L., Emmett-Oglesby, M.W., Thomas, W.H., Schenk, S., 1994. Failure of ritanserin to block the discriminative or reinforcing stimulus effects of cocaine. Pharmacol. Biochem. Behav. 48, 473-478. Pere, J.J., 1995. Clinical pharmacology: the example of clozapine (Leponex). Encephale 21 (3), 9-12. Phelix, C.F., Broderick, P.A., 1995. Light microscopic immunocytochemical evidence of converging serotonin and dopamine terminals in ventrolateral nucleus accumbens. Brain Res. Rev. 37, 37-40. Pijnenburg, A.J.J., Honig, W.M.M., van Rossum, J.M., 1975. Effects of antagonists upon locomotor stimulation induced by injection of dopamine and noradrenaline into the nucleus accumbens of nialamide-pretreated rats. Psychopharmacologia 41, 175-180. Porrino, L.J., Ritz, M.C., Goodman, N.L., Sharpe, L.G., Kuhar, M.J., Goldberg, S.R., 1989. Differential effects of the pharmacological manipulation of serotonin systems on cocaine and amphetamine selfadministration in rats. Life Sci. 45, 1529-1535. Price, L.H., Charney, D.S., Delgado, P.L., Heninger, G.R., 2001. Lithium and serotonin function: implications for the serotonin hypothesis of depression. Psychopharmacology (Berl.) 100, 3-12. Ramana, S.V., Desiraju, T., 1989. Investigation of influence of diazepam, valproate, cyproheptadine and cortisol on the rewarding ventral tegmental self-stimulation behavior. Ind. J. Physiol. Pharmacol. 33, 179-185. Ranjan, R., Meltzer, H.Y., 1996. Acute and long-term effectiveness of clozapine in treatment-resistant psychotic depression. Biol. Psychiatry 40, 253-258. Reith, M.E., Sershen, H., Allen, D.L., Lajtha, A., 1983. A portion of [ 3 H] cocaine binding in brain is associated with serotonin neurons. Mol. Pharmacol. 23, 600-606. Richardson, N.R., Roberts, D.C.S., 1991. Fluoxetine pretreatment reduces breaking point on a progressive ratio schedule reinforced by intravenous cocaine self-administration in the rat. Life Sci. 49, 833-840. Richelson, E., Souder, T., 2000. Binding of antipsychotic drugs to human brain receptors focus on newer generation compounds. Life Sci. 68 (1), 29-39. Risner, M.E., Jones, B.E., 1980. Intravenous self-administration of cocaine and norcocaine by dogs. Psychopharmacology 71, 83-89. Roberts, D.C.S., Koob, G.F., 1982. Disruption of cocaine self-administration following 6-hydroxydopamine lesions of the ventral tegmental area in rats. Pharmacol. Biochem. Behav. 17, 901-904. Roberts, D.C.S., Corcoran, M.E.O., Fibiger, H.C., 1977. On the role of ascending catecholaminergic systems in intravenous self-administration of cocaine. Pharmacol. Biochem. Behav. 6, 615-620. Robertson, A., MacDonald, C., 1986. The effects of some atypical neuroleptics on apomorphine-induced behaviors as a measure of their relative potencies in blocking presynaptic versus postsynaptic dopamine receptors. Pharmacol. Biochem. Behav. 24 (6), 1639-1643. Rosenthal, R.N., Miner, C.R., 1997. Differential diagnosis of substanceinduced psychosis and schizophrenia in patients with substance use disorders. Schizophr. Bull. 23 (2), 187-193. Ross, S.B., Renyi, A.L., 1969. Inhibition of the uptake of tritiated 5-hydroxytryptamine in brain tissue. Eur. J. Pharmacol. 7, 270-277.

PA. Broderick et al. / Progress in Neuro-Psychopharmacology & Biological Psychiatry 28 (2004) 157—171 171

Rosse, R.B., Collins Jr., J.R, Fay-McCarthy, M., Alim, T.N., Wyatt, R.J., Deutsch, S.I. 1994. Phenomenologic comparison of the idiopathic psychosis of schizophrenia and drug-induced cocaine and phencyclidine psychoses: a retrospective study. Clin. Neuropharmacol. 17 (4), 359-369. Satel, S.L., Edell, W.S., 1991. Cocaine-induced paranoia and psychosis proneness. Am. J. Psychiatry 148 (12), 1708-1711. Satel, S.L., Seibyl, J.P., Charney, D.S., 1991. Prolonged cocaine psychosis implies underlying major psychopathology. J. Clin. Psychiatry 52 (8), 349-350. Schotte, A., Janssen, P.F., Megens, A.A., Leysen, J.E., 1993. Occupancy of central neurotransmitter receptors by risperidone, clozapine and haloperidol, measured ex vivo by quantitative autoradiography. Brain Res. 631 (2), 191-202. Schotte, A., Janssen, P.F.M., Gommeren, W., Luyten, W.H.M.L., Van Gompel, P., Lesage, A.S., De Loore, K., Leysen, J.E., 1996. Risperidone compared with new and reference antipsychotic drugs: in vitro and in vivo receptor binding. Psychopharmacology 124, 57-73. Serper, M.R., Chou, J.C., Allen, M.H., Czobor, P., Cancro, R., 1999. Symptomatic overlap of cocaine intoxication and acute schizophrenia at emergency presentation. Schizophr. Bull. 25 (2), 387-394. Sherer, M.A., Kumor, K.M., Cone, E.J., Jaffe, J.H., 1988. Suspiciousness induced by four-hour intravenous infusions of cocaine. Preliminary findings. Arch. Gen. Psychiatry 45 (7), 673-677. Spealman, R.D., Bergman, J., Madras, B.K., Kamien, J.B., Melia, K.F., 1992. Role of DI and D2 dopamine receptors in the behavioral effects of cocaine. Neurochem. Int. 20, S147-SI52 (Supplement). Sprouse, J.S., Reynolds, L.S., Braselton, J.P., Rollema, H., Zom, S.H., 1999. Comparison of the novel antipsychotic ziprasidone with clozapine and olanzepine: inhibition of dorsal raphe cell firing and the role of 5-HT(lA) receptor activation. Neuropsychopharmacology 21 (5), 622-631. Stahl, S.M., 2000. Essential psychopharmacology. Cambridge Univ. Press, New York. Steinbusch, H.W.M., 1981. Distribution of serotonin-immunoreactivity in the central nervous system of the rat-cell bodies and terminals. Neurosci. 6, 557-618. Sumiyoshi, T., Suzuki, K., Sakamoto, H., Yamaguchi, N., Hirofumi, M., Shiba, K., Yokogawa, K., 1995. Atypicality of several antipsychotics on the basis of dopamine-D 2 and serotonin-5-HT 2 receptor occupancy. Neuropsychopharmacology 12, 57-64. Sun, L., Lau, C.E., 2001. Simultaneous pharmacokinetic modeling of cocaine and its metabolites, norcocaine and benzoylecgonine, after intravenous and oral administration in rats. Drug Metab. Dispos. 29 (9), 1183-1189. Taylor, W.A., Staby, A.E., 1992. Acute treatment of alcohol and cocaine emergencies. Recent Dev. Alcohol. 10, 179-191.  
Tsibulsky, V.L., Grocki, S., Dashevsky, B.A., Kehne, J.H., Schmidt, C.J., Sorenson, S.M., Frank, R.A., 1998. Mixed D 2 /5-HT 2A antagonism of cocaine-induced facilitation of brain stimulation reward. Pharmacol. Biochem. Behav. 59 (2), 275-280. Tueth, M.J., 1993. High incidence of psychosis in cocaine intoxication and preventing violence in the ED. Am. J. Emerg. Med. 11 (6), 676. Van Bockstaele, E.J., Pickel, V.M., 1993. Ultrastructure of serotonin-immunoreactive terminals in the core and shell of the rat nucleus accumbens: cellular substrates for interactions with catecholamine afferents. J. Comp. Neurol. 334, 603-617. Van Bockstaele, E.J., Cestari, D.M., Pickel, V.M., 1994. Synaptic structure and connectivity of serotonin in the ventral tegmental area: potential sites for modulation of mesolimbic dopamine neurons. Brain Res. 674, 307-322. Volonte, M., Monferini, E., Cerutti, M., Fodritto, F., Borsini, F., 1997. BIMG 80, a novel potential antipsychotic drug: evidence for multireceptor actions and preferential release of dopamine in prefrontal cortex. J. Neurochem. 69 (1), 182-190. Walsh, S.L., Cunningham, K.A., 1997. Serotonergic mechanisms involved in the discriminative stimulus, reinforcing, and subjective effects of cocaine. Psychopharmacology 130, 41-58. Weinberger, D.R., Berman, K.F., Suddath, R., Torrey, E.F., 1992. Evidence of dysfunction of a prefrontal-limbic network in schizophrenia: a magnetic imaging and regional cerebral blood flow study of discordant monozygotic twins. Am. J. Psychiatry 149 (7), 890-897. Williams, R., 2001. Optimal dosing with risperidone: updated recommendations. J. Clin. Psychiatry 62 (4), 282-289. Wise, R.A., 1995. D r and D 2 -type contributions to psychomotor sensitization and reward: implications for pharmacological treatment strategies. Clin. Neuropharmacol. 18 (Suppl. 1), S74-S83. Wise, R.A., Bozarth, M.A., 1987. A psychostimulant theory of addiction. Psychol. Rev. 94, 469-492. Wise, R.A., Rompre, P.P., 1989. Brain dopamine and reward. Annu. Rev. Psychol. 40, 191-225. Yan, Q.S., 2000. Activation of 5-HT 2A /2c receptors within the nucleus accumbens increases local dopaminergic transmission. Brain Res. Bull. 51 (1), 75-81. Yan, Q.S., Maarten, E.A., Yan, S., 2000. Enhanced accumbal dopamine release following 5-HT 2A receptor stimulation in rats pretreated with intermittent cocaine. Brain Res. 863 (1-2), 254-258. Zahniser, N.R., Peris, J., Dwoskin, L.P., Curella, P., Yasuda, R.P., O’Keefe, L., Boyson, S.J., 1988. Sensitization to cocaine in the nigrostriatal dopamine system. NIDA Res. Monogr. 88, 55-77. Zimmet, S.V., Strous, R.D., Burgess, E.S., Kohnstamm, S., Green, A.L., 2000. Effects of clozapine on substance use in patients with schizophrenia and schizoaffective disorder: a retrospective survey. J. Clin. Psychopharmacol. 20 (1), 94-98.
