# Efficacy of a Mixed Amphetamine Salts Compound in

ORIGINAL ARTICLE Efficacy of a Mixed Amphetamine Salts Compound in Adults With Attention-Deficit/ Hyperactivity Disorder Thomas Spencer, MD; Joseph Biederman, MD; Timothy Wilens, MD; Stephen Faraone, PhD; Jefferson Prince, MD; Kristine Gerard, MD; Robert Doyle, MD; Asha Parekh, MD; Jake Kagan, BA; Sarah Kate Bearman, BA

Background: We report on a controlled trial of a mixed amphetamine salts compound (Adderall, dextroamphetamine sulfate, dextro-, levoamphetamine sulfate, dextroamphetamine aspartate, levoamphetamine aspartate, and dextroamphetamine saccharate) in the treatment of adult attention-deficit/hyperactivity disorder (ADHD). Methods: This was a 7-week, randomized, doubleblind, placebo-controlled, crossover study of Adderall in 27 well-characterized adults satisfying full DSM-IV criteria for ADHD of childhood onset and persistent symptoms into adulthood. Medication was titrated up to 30 mg twice a day. Outcome measures included the ADHD Rating Scale and the Clinical Global Impression Score. Comorbid psychiatric disorders were assessed to test for potential effects on treatment outcome.  
Results: TreatmentwithAdderallatanaverageoraldose of54mg(administeredin2dailydoses)waseffectiveand welltolerated.Drug-specificimprovementinADHDsymptoms was highly significant overall (42% decrease on the ADHD Rating Scale, P Ͻ .001), and sufficiently robust to be detectable in a parallel groups comparison restricted tothefirst3weeksoftheprotocol( P Ͻ .001).Thepercentageofsubjectswhoimproved(reductionintheADHDratingscaleof Ն 30%)wassignificantlyhigherwithAdderall treatment than with a placebo (70% vs 7%; P =.001). Conclusions: Adderall was effective and well tolerated in the short-term treatment of adults with ADHD. More workisneededtoevaluatethelong-termeffectsofAdderall, or other amphetamine compounds, in the treatment of adults with ADHD. Arch Gen Psychiatry. 2001;58:775-782

From the Pediatric Psychopharmacology Unit, Massachusetts General Hospital (Drs Spencer, Biederman, Wilens, Faraone, Prince, Gerard, Doyle, and Parekh, Mr Kagan, and Ms Bearman) and the Department of Psychiatry, Harvard Medical School (Drs Spencer, Biederman, Wilens, Faraone, Prince, Gerard, Doyle, and Parekh), Boston.  
NCHILDREN withattention-deficit/ hyperactivity disorder (ADHD), theliteraturesuggeststhatthepercentage of responders is comparable between the stimulants. 1 However, crossover studies of dextroamphetamine and methylphenidate (6 studies, 274 subjects) reveal differences in response on the individual level. Of responders, 52% responded equally well to both, 25% preferentially to amphetamine, and 23% to methylphenidate. 2-7 However, these differences in response may be because of either efficacy or adverse effects. In adults with ADHD, controlled studies have reported an average response of 54% of subjects both to methylphenidate (6 studies, 139 subjects) and pemoline(2studies,93subjects). 8 Toour knowledge, the only previous controlled trialofamphetaminesinadultswithADHD was a recent short-term study of dextroamphetamine in adults with broadly defined ADHD indicating efficacy. 9 In addition,thereisacontrolledstudyinnormal men 10 aswellasseveralcasestudies 11,12 and open series 13,14 in adults with ADHD. For  
example, in a placebo-controlled, singledose crossover study of dextroamphetamine in normal men (N=31), Rapoport et al 10 reported improved cognitive performance.Inanopen,6-weektrialofdextroamphetaminein18adultswithADHD, dramaticchangeswerereportedinbehavior, but not on cognitive measures. 13 See also page 784 Despite the well-documented efficacyofstimulantdrugsinthetreatmentof ADHD,theirshortdurationofactioncommonly requires a 3-times-daily dosing schedule to obtain a daylong clinical effect. In children with ADHD the prevalence of after-school stimulant use has increased. 15 Suchafter-schooldosinghasbeen recommended for ADHD-associated nonacademicadaptivedysfunctionsindailyliving, communication, and socialization skills. 16 Similar adaptive dysfunctions are salient in adults with ADHD. Thus, a simplified dosing regimen with a longeractingcompoundcouldbeparticularlyimportant for adults with ADHD.

(REPRINTED) ARCH GEN PSYCHIATRY/VOL 58, AUG 2001 WWW.ARCHGENPSYCHIATRY.COM 775 ©2001 American Medical Association. All rights reserved. Downloaded From: http://archpsyc.jamanetwork.com/ by a University of Sussex Library User on 04/04/2016

I  
SUBJECTS AND METHODS SUBJECTS Subjectswere30outpatientadultswithADHDbetween19 and 60 years of age ascertained from clinical referrals. To be included, subjects had to satisfy full diagnostic criteria for DSM-IV ADHD based on clinical assessment confirmedbystructureddiagnosticinterview.Attention-deficit/ hyperactivitydisorderdiagnoses,includingageofonsetby 7 years, were determined by self-report as well as school recordsandreportbyothersasavailable.Weexcludedpotentialsubjectsiftheyhadanyclinicallysignificantchronic medical conditions, abnormal baseline laboratory values, IQ less than 80, delirium, dementia, or amnestic disorders, any other clinically unstable psychiatric conditions (ie, bipolar disorder, psychosis), drug or alcohol abuse or dependencewithinthe6monthsprecedingthestudy,previous adequate trial of Adderall, or current use of psychotropics.Wealsoexcludedpregnantornursingfemales.This study was approved by the institutional review board and all subjects completed a written informed consent before inclusion in the study. PROCEDURE Thiswasadouble-blind,placebo-controlled,randomized, crossovertrial,comparingAdderallwithplacebo.Therewere two3-weektreatmentperiodsseparatedby1weekofwashout to minimize carryover effects of medication. During washout, subjects received placebo pills to maintain the blind. The order of treatment (Adderall, placebo, or placebo, Adderall) was randomized by the research pharmacy. Weekly supplies of Adderall or placebo were dispensed by the pharmacy in identical-appearing 10-mg capsules. Study physicians prescribed medication under double-blind conditions in twice-a-day dosing (7:30 AM , 2:30 PM ).Compliancewasmonitoredbypillcountsateach physicianvisit.Studymedicationwastitratedupto20mg/d (10mgtwicedaily)byweek1,40mg/d(20mgtwicedaily) by week 2, and 60 mg/d (30 mg twice daily) by week 3, unless adverse effects emerged. Although drug or placebo status was randomized, dose within each phase was not. Study treatment was always titrated from low to high dose  
to avoid exposure to high initial doses of active medication and to minimize adverse effects. Other psychoactive medications were not permitted during the protocol. ASSESSMENT Before inclusion in the study, patients underwent a comprehensive clinical assessment that included a psychiatric evaluation by a board-certified adult and child psychiatrist (T.S., T.W., J.P., K.G., R.D., and A.P.), a structured diagnostic interview, a medical history, and laboratory assessments(liverfunctiontests,completebloodcounts,and electrocardiograms). The structured diagnostic interview used was the Structured Clinical Interview for DSM-IV , 28 supplemented for childhood disorders by modules ( DSMIV ADHD and conduct disorder) from the Kiddie Schedule for Affective Disorders and Schizophrenia for SchoolAgeChildren(EpidemiologicVersion). 29 Diagnosticraters estimated a level of ADHD impairment (mild, moderate, or severe) by assessing the degree of dysfunction (social, familial,academic,andoccupational)specificallyattributable to the ADHD symptoms. TohavebeengivenafulldiagnosisofadultADHD,the subject must have (1) met full DSM-IV criteria (at least 6 of 9 symptoms) for inattentive or hyperactive/impulsive subtypes 30 by the age of 7 years as well as currently (within the pastmonth);(2)describedachroniccourseofADHDsymptomsfromchildhoodtoadulthood;and(3)endorsedamoderate or severe level of impairment attributed to the ADHD symptoms. Diagnostic reliability of the structured interviews was established by having 3 experienced, boardcertified child and adult psychiatrists diagnose the conditionsof35subjectsfromaudiotapedinterviewsmadebythe assessment staff. The mean ␬ was 0.91. A ␬ of 1.0 was obtainedforADHDwitha95%confidenceintervalof0.8to1.0. Toassessintellectualfunctioning,weadministeredsubtestsoftheWechslerAdultIntelligenceScale,Revised 31 and theWideRangeAchievementTest,Revised. 32 Learningdisabilities 33 weredefinedbytheprocedurerecommendedby Reynolds 34 thatprovidesastatisticalmethodforoperationalizing the difference between achievement and intelligence scores. Family history was determined by questioning the subject about the presence of psychiatric disorders in firstor second-degree relatives. Socioeconomic status was measured by the Hollingshead Four-Factor Index of

There are sustained-release preparations available for both methylphenidate and dextroamphetamine (spansules).Whilesomereportshaveindicatedanequal responsetomethylphenidateimmediate-releaseandsustained-release, 4,17,18 others have not. 19-22 Dextroamphetaminespansulesmaybemoreconsistentlyeffective 4 ;however, few studies have examined effectiveness beyond 4 hours. 4,23 Whilerelativelylong-acting,pemolinehasbeen relegatedtosecond-linestatusbecauseofconcernsabout hepatotoxicity. 24 An additional longer-acting amphetamine product is the mixed amphetamine salts compound, Adderall. Adderallconsistsof25%levoamphetamineand75%dextroamphetamine in 4 salts. Recent controlled studies in childrenhavereportedthatAdderallisaseffectiveasmethylphenidateimmediate-releaseintheimprovementofbe-  
havior in classroom and recreational settings and in increasedacademicperformance,andthatthetimecourse of the response is longer, as shown in detailed pharmacodynamic studies. 25,26 While there has been no direct comparison between Adderall and dextroamphetamine, therearetheoreticreasonsforpotentialdifferences.Previousreportscomparinglevoamphetaminewithdextroamphetamine have suggested that some children respond preferentially to each isomer. 27 We now report results of a randomized, placebocontrolledclinicaltrialofanamphetamine(Adderall)in thetreatmentofadultswithADHD.Wehypothesizedthat atwice-dailydosingregimenofAdderallatclinicallyrelevant doses will be effective in the treatment of adults with ADHD and provide adequate daylong coverage of their symptoms.

(REPRINTED) ARCH GEN PSYCHIATRY/VOL 58, AUG 2001 WWW.ARCHGENPSYCHIATRY.COM 776 ©2001 American Medical Association. All rights reserved. Downloaded From: http://archpsyc.jamanetwork.com/ by a University of Sussex Library User on 04/04/2016

Social Status, 35 with low values indicating high socioeconomic status. To assess change during treatment, board-eligible or board-certifiedpsychiatristsusedthefollowingscales.Overall severity and change in severity of ADHD was assessed with the Clinical Global Impression Scale. 36 The Clinical GlobalImpressionScaleincludesglobalseverity(1,notill, to7,extremelyill)andglobalimprovement(1,verymuch improved, to 7, very much worse) scales. The ADHD Rating Scale, 37 shown to be sensitive to drug effects in pediatric 38 and adult 39-42 populations, assesses each of the 18 individual criteria symptoms of ADHD in DSM-IV on a severitygrid(0,notpresent;3,severe;overallminimumscore, 0; maximum score, 54). Five raters independently reviewed audiotaped interviews of 5 subjects. An intraclass correlationof0.99wasobtainedforinterraterreliabilityof theADHDsymptomchecklist.Fordepression,weusedthe 17-item Hamilton Depression Scale (HAM-D) (minimum, 0; maximum, 52) 43 and the Beck Depression Inventory (minimum, 0; maximum, 63). 44 For anxiety, we used the Hamilton Anxiety Scale (HAM-A) (minimum, 0; maximum,56). 45 Thepresenceofadverseexperienceswaselicited by open-ended questions at each visit. We administeredtheHAM-D,HAM-A,andBeckDepressionInventory before and after each arm of the study. All other symptom rating scales were administered weekly. Raters were blind to treatment assignment. SinceADHDhasbeenassociatedwithcognitiveimpairments, 46 weincludedneuropsychologicalmeasurestotestfor potential drug effects on cognition. Based on our review of theliteratureandourpreviousneuropsychologicstudieswith ADHD children and adults, 46 we selected neuropsychological tests that measure sustained attention, response inhibition, set shifting and categorization, selective attention and visual scanning, and organization and recall of visual constructions. The test battery included an auditory version of the Continuous Performance Test, 47,48 the Stroop test, 49 and theRey-OsterriethComplexFigure. 50 Thisneuropsychologicalbatterywasadministered3times,atbaselineandaftereach arm of the study. SUBJECT CHARACTERISTICS One hundred three prospective participants applied for entry into the study. Of these, 30 were enrolled. Of the  
73 who were not enrolled, 17 did not complete the initial evaluation; 14 were excluded because of current substance or alcohol abuse; 12 did not meet full DSM-IV criteria for ADHD; 11 met entry criteria but were unable to commit to the demands of a controlled study; 12 were excluded for medical conditions and/or current use of concomitant medications (4 seizures, 3 sensory motor impairment, 2 hypertension, and 3 other); and 7 were excluded for unstable psychiatric conditions or current use of psychotropics (3 psychosis, 1 bipolar, and 3 depression). Ofthe30subjectsenrolledinthestudy,27(90%)completed it. Three subjects did not complete the first treatmentarm:1afterthefirstweekand2afterthesecondweek, and were not included in the final analyses. These 3 patientswerereceivingplaceboandneverreceivedAdderall. Thus, the final sample consisted of 15 men and 12 women (age:mean±SD,38±9.3years).Seventy-eightpercent(21/ 27)metcriteriaforADHDcombinedtypeinchildhood(44% [12/27] currently) and 22% (6/27) met criteria for ADHD predominantly inattentive type in childhood (56% [15/ 27] currently). No one met criteria for ADHD predominantlyhyperactive-impulsivetype.Ten(37%)ofthe27 subjects had been diagnosed as having ADHD previously and had received other medications (8 other stimulants; 2 desipramine). STATISTICAL ANALYSIS TheprimaryoutcomemeasuresweretheADHDRatingScale andtheClinicalGlobalImpressionScale.Improvementwas definedeitherasa30%reductionintheADHDRatingScale or“much”or“verymuchimproved”ontheClinicalGlobal Impression Scale. For statistical tests of change between 2 pointsintime,weusedtheMcNemartest(forbinarydata), the paired t test (for continuous data), or the Wilcoxon signed rank test (for ordinal data). For analyses that used all of the time points in our data set, we used random effects,cross-sectionaltime-seriesmodelsusingthemethod ofgeneralizedestimatingequations(GEE)asdescribedby Liang and Zeger 51 and Zeger et al 52 These models estimatedmaineffectsofdrug(Adderallvsplacebo),time(week instudy),andorder(Adderallfirstvsplacebofirst),aswell as interactions among these effects. Significance was set at the .05 level and all tests were 2-tailed.

RESULTS As depicted in Table 1 , 93% (N=25) of ADHD subjects had at least 1 lifetime comorbid psychiatric disorder. The mean±SD number of comorbid diagnoses was 2.9±2.5 per subject. Baseline ratings of depression (HAM-D, 4.3, and Beck Depression Inventory, 6.2) and anxiety (HAM-A, 6.0) were low. Using standard cutoff points for moderate severity on ratings of depression (HAM-D, Ͼ 16; Beck Depression Inventory, Ͼ 19) and anxiety (HAM-A, Ͼ 21), only 11% (N=3) of subjects had baseline scores of depression or anxiety that were moderately severe or worse. Sixty-seven percent of ADHD adults had 1 or more firstor second-degree relatives with ADHD. Despite average to above-average intelligence (mean±SD, 108±11), 37% of the subjects  
required tutoring in school and 19% had repeated at least 1 grade. EFFICACY Averaged across both periods, at week 1 the average daily doses of Adderall and placebo were both 20 mg; by week 2, 38.5 mg and 40 mg; by week 3, 53.7 mg and 59.3 mg, respectively.Examiningthefirstandsecondperiodsseparately,inspectionofthe Figure showssomeevidenceofa carryover effect in that the mean value of the ADHD Rating Scale of the medication-first group at week 4 (placebo-washout) did not fully return to the baseline (Figure,B).However,theordereffect(medicationfirstvs medication second) was not significant (random effects: z =0.99, P =.32).Despitetheweakordereffect,wefounda

(REPRINTED) ARCH GEN PSYCHIATRY/VOL 58, AUG 2001 WWW.ARCHGENPSYCHIATRY.COM 777 ©2001 American Medical Association. All rights reserved. Downloaded From: http://archpsyc.jamanetwork.com/ by a University of Sussex Library User on 04/04/2016

Table 1. Clinical and Demographic Characteristics of Sample (N = 27) *  
P =.002), with further improvement by week 2 ( z =5.6, P Ͻ .001)andweek3( z =6.3, P Ͻ .001).Overall,therewas a very significant drug by time interaction for ADHD

Demographics Male, No. (%) White, No. (%) Age, mean(SD), y Socioeconomic status, mean(SD)†  
15(56) 26(96) 38.8(9.27) 2.0(0.73)  
symptoms( z =6.4, P Ͻ .001)withoutsignificantmaineffectsofdrug(Adderallorplacebo)ortime(baselineand weeks 1, 2, and 3). To further evaluate the absolute rate of improvement, we analyzed end-of-treatment results (averaged

Psychiatric disorders, No. (%)  
Past  
Current  
across both periods) using a preestablished definition of improvementofmorethana30%reductionontheADHD

Majordepressionwithsevereimpairment 2(7) 1(4) RatingScale(seethe“SubjectsandMethods”section).Us-

Majordepressionwithatleast moderateimpairment Multipleanxiety disorders ( Ն 2) Atleast1anxiety disorder Substancedependence Alcohol dependence Antisocial personality disorder  
12(44) 5(19) 14(52) 4(15) 7(26) 6(22)  
3(11) 1(4) 7(26) … … 0(0)  
ing this definition, 70.4% (19/27) of patients showed improvement of ADHD symptoms while receiving Adderall comparedwithonly7.4%(2/27)whowerereceivingplacebo ( ␹ 21 =13.8, P Ͻ .001). Similarly, when improvement wasdefinedasmuchorverymuchimprovedontheClinical Global Improvement Scale, 66.7% (18/27) of patients

Conductdisorder Any comorbiddisorder PastGAF, mean(SD) CurrentGAF, mean(SD) Family history ofdisorders, No. (%) ADHD Depression Anxiety Antisocial personality Substanceabusedependence Cognitivetesting, mean(SD) WechslerAdultIntelligenceScales Freedomfromdistractibility IQ Full-scaleIQ Achievementscores, mean(SD) WRAT subscalepercentiles Arithmetic Reading Academic underachievement, No. (%)‡ Arithmetic Reading School failure, No. (%) Repeatedgrade Placementinspecial class Tutoring  
6(22) 0(0) 25(93) 6(22) 53(5.05) 61(4.58) 18(67) 15(56) 10(37) 3(11) 11(41) 102(12.05) 108(11.32) 47(23.85) 60(22.64) 7(26) 0(0) 5(19) 2(7) 10(37)  
receivingAdderallwereratedasimprovedcomparedwith only 3.7% (1/27) receiving placebo ( ␹ 21 =14.2, P Ͻ .001). In addition, Adderall treatment significantly reduced the GlobalSeverityScaleratingsofADHD(4.7±0.7to3.4±1.0; z =4.3, P Ͻ .001). In contrast, placebo did not (4.6±0.7 to 4.4±0.9; z =0.8, P =.45). Adderall treatment (averaged across both periods) was associated with clinically and statistically significantimprovementofallbut2ofthe18individualADHD symptoms, with the notable effects observed for symptoms in both subclusters of hyperactivity/impulsivity and inattention ( Table 2 ). However, fewer of the individual hyperactive/impulsivity items would achieve significance when corrected for multiple comparisons. In contrast, the effect of placebo on individual ADHD symptoms was negligible. Otherthanraceandsocioeconomicstatus,oursample representedagroupofadultswithdiverseclinicalcharacteristics (Table 1). Therefore, we examined each of these characteristicsaspotentialconfounders.Whilewedidnot havesufficientpowertofullyexaminethisissue,adetailed analysis revealed no effects of ADHD subtype (combined vspredominatelyinattentive),sex,age,historyofcomorbiddisorders,lifetimehistoryoftreatment,currentcomor-

* GAF indicates Global AssessmentofFunctioning; ADHD, attention-deficit/hyperactivity disorder; WRAT, WideRangeAchievement Test; andellipses, notapplicable. †Socioeconomic status was measuredby theHollingsheadFour-Factor IndexofSocial Status, 35 withlowvalues indicating highsocioeconomic status. ‡Learning disabilities 33 weredefinedby theprocedurerecommendedby Reynolds, 34 whichprovides astatistical methodforoperationalizing the differencebetweenachievementandintelligencescores. significanteffectofdrugforboththefirstperiod(week0-3: Adderall,15;placebo,12; z =5.5, P Ͻ .001)andthesecond period(week4-7:Adderall,12;placebo,15; z =5.7, P Ͻ .001). Inadditiontheaveragechangescores(ADHDRatingScale) were similar in each period of the study (35% vs 51% decreasewhilereceivingAdderalland5%vs7%increasewhile receivingplacebo;firstvssecondperiod,respectively).While none of the subjects worsened while receiving Adderall, 55% (15/27) worsened while receiving placebo. In addition, we analyzed the results after combining the first and second period. Response to Adderall attainedsignificancebythefirstweekoftreatment( z =3.1,  
biddisorders,orpositivefamilyhistoryofpsychiatricdisorderonratesofimprovementwhilereceivingAdderallor placebo.Asmentionedearlier,baselineratingsofdepression (HAM-D, BDI) and anxiety (HAM-A) were very low and were not affected by treatment with Adderall. At baseline, adults with ADHD in this study performedcomparablywithnon-ADHDadultsonsomecognitivetests(Rey-OsterriethComplexFigure,Stroop[Interferencecondition]).Onothertests(Stroop[Wordand Color], and Continuous Performance Test) adults with ADHDwerefoundtohavemilddifficultyatbaselinewith equalimprovementwhilereceivingmedicationandplacebo ( Table 3 ). ADVERSE EFFECTS Adverseeffectswerereportedontheentiresample,atany time during treatment and tabulated in Table 4 . Adderall was well tolerated and no serious adverse effects were observed.Ofindividualadverseeffectsreported,onlyAdderall-associated appetite suppression and agitation reached

(REPRINTED) ARCH GEN PSYCHIATRY/VOL 58, AUG 2001 WWW.ARCHGENPSYCHIATRY.COM 778 ©2001 American Medical Association. All rights reserved. Downloaded From: http://archpsyc.jamanetwork.com/ by a University of Sussex Library User on 04/04/2016

45 40 35 30 25  
A  
B

Adderall

20 Adderall Placebo

15  
∗ †  
Placebo z = 5.1, P <.001 z = 5.3, P <.001  
‡ § II  
z = 2.2, P <.05 z = 4.4, P <.001 z = 5.6, P <.001

10 0 1 2 ∗ 3 † 4 5 ‡ 6 § 7 II

Week Week

Thecontrolledstudy ofAdderall inadultattention-deficit/hyperactivity disorder(ADHD). Fifteenparticipants wererandomizedtoAdderall and12toplacebo during thefirstperiod(A). During thesecondperiod(B), the15participants whoweregivenAdderall werecrossedovertoplacebo, andthe12participants whoweregivenplacebowerecrossedovertoAdderall. Table 2. Individual Symptom Scores on the Attention-Deficit/Hyperactivity Disorder Scale at Baseline and at the End of Treatment of the Placebo and Adderall Conditions

Baseline, Mean (SD) End of Treatment, Mean (SD)

Symptom Cluster * Placebo Adderall Placebo Adderall

Hyperactivity/Impulsivity

Has difficulty remaining seated 1.22(0.8) 1.78(0.9) 1.56(0.9) 0.96†‡§ (0.6)

Is fidgety 1.44(0.8) 1.89(0.8) 1.63(0.8) 1.15‡§ (0.8)

Has difficulty playing quietly 1.11(0.9) 1.48(0.9) 1.19(0.8) 0.93‡§ (0.8)

Talks excessively 1.33(1.0) 1.63(1.0) 1.41(1.1) 1.00†‡§ ࿣ (0.8)

Interrupts orintrudes 1.52(0.8) 1.67(0.8) 1.41(0.9) 0.93†‡§ ࿣ (0.9)

Blurts outanswers 1.19(0.9) 1.67(0.7) 1.56 ࿣ ¶(1.0) 0.78†‡§ (0.7)

Has difficulty waiting turn 1.48(1.0) 2.00(0.9) 1.70(1.0) 1.04†‡§ (0.9)

Often“onthego”/acts likedrivenby amotor 1.48(1.0) 1.78(1.0) 1.52(1.0) 0.96†‡§ ࿣ (0.9)

Hyperactivity/restlessness 1.41(0.9) 1.63(1.0) 1.63(1.0) 0.96†‡§ ࿣ (0.7)

Hyperactivity/impulsivity (overall) 1.35(0.6) 1.72(0.5) 1.51(0.7) 0.97†‡§ ࿣ (0.6)

Inattentiveness

Has difficulty sustaining attention 2.41(0.6) 2.37(0.6) 2.30(0.6) 1.37†‡§ (0.8)

Has difficulty following instructions 2.00(0.8) 2.15(0.7) 1.97(0.8) 1.45†‡§ ࿣ (0.9)

Is easily distracted 2.33(0.6) 2.44(0.6) 2.37(0.7) 1.52†‡§ (0.8)

Loses things 1.78(0.8) 2.11(0.8) 2.00(0.9) 1.04†‡§ (0.8)

Does notlisten 1.93(0.7) 2.15(0.7) 1.89(0.8) 1.04†‡§ (0.8)

Fails topay closeattentiontodetails 1.96(0.7) 2.26(0.7) 1.93(1.0) 1.34†‡§ (0.9)

Has difficulties organizing 2.07(0.9) 2.30(0.9) 2.04(0.08) 1.45†‡§ (0.8)

Avoids orstrongly dislikes mental tasks 1.81(0.7) 2.37(0.8) 2.15(0.8) 1.45†‡§ (0.9)

Is oftenforgetful 1.78(0.8) 2.15(0.7) 1.85(0.7) 1.30†‡§ (0.8)

Inattentiveness (overall) 2.01(0.5) 2.26(0.5) 2.05(0.6) 1.33†‡§ (0.7)

* Rating scalesymptomscores rangefrom0to3(0, “notaproblem”; 1, “mildproblem”; 2, “moderateproblem”; 3, “severeproblem”). †Adderall vs placebotreatmentby Wilcoxonsignedranktest. ‡ P =.04. §Endoftreatmentvs baselineby Wilcoxonsignedranktest. ࿣ P =.05. ¶ Forthis comparison, thevalueatendpointwhilereceiving placebowas significantly worsethanbaseline.

ourthresholdforsignificance(Table4).Allpatientswho receivedactivemedicationcompletedthestudy.Sixpatients receivingAdderalldidnotreachorwerenotabletoremain onthefinaltargetdoseof60mgbecauseofsubjectiveadverseeffectsthatincludedanxiety(n=3),fatigue(n=1),increasedobsessivesymptoms(n=1),andconfusion(n=1). However,thesepatientswereabletotoleratealowerdose. One patient did not tolerate 60 mg of placebo because of insomnia.Inaddition,significantbutaclinicallysmalldifferencewasobservedwithAdderalltreatmentindiastolic  
bloodpressure(76vs71mmHg)( t 25 =2.6, P =.02).While weightdecreasedanaverageof1.8kg(4lb)(167vs163lb [75vs73kg])( t 25 =5.8, P Ͻ .001),weightlosswasnotofclinical significance in any individual patient. COMMENT In a double-blind study of amphetamines in adults with ADHD,wefoundthattreatmentwiththemixedamphetamine salts product Adderall, administered twice daily

(REPRINTED) ARCH GEN PSYCHIATRY/VOL 58, AUG 2001 WWW.ARCHGENPSYCHIATRY.COM 779 ©2001 American Medical Association. All rights reserved. Downloaded From: http://archpsyc.jamanetwork.com/ by a University of Sussex Library User on 04/04/2016

ADHD Rating Scale  
Table 3. Neuropsychological Functioning at Baseline and at the End of Treatment of the Placebo and Adderall Conditions *  
Table 4. Adverse Events While Receiving Adderall and Placebo

Baseline Stroop Test  
Placebo  
Adderall  
Adverse Event Insomnia  
Drug, No. (%) 10(37)  
Placebo, No. (%) ␹ 2 * 4(14.8) 3.6  
P .06

WordT-Score 44.3(9.7) 48.3†‡ (9.6) 49.9†§ (8.7) Loss ofappetite 8(29.6) 3(11.1) 5.0 .03

ColorT-Score 41.0(8.7) 43.6† ࿣ (9.4) 46.0†§ (8.2) Depression 1(3.7) 2(7.4) 1.0 .32

ColorWordT-Score 43.4(10.4) 49.5†¶(11.1) 48.6† ࿣ (11.8) Anxiety 7(25.9) 4(14.8) 1.8 .18

InterferenceT-Score 49.7(6.6) 53.1† ࿣ (7.6) 50.1(7.8) Headache 3(11.1) 2(7.41) 0.33 .56

Rey-Osterrieth Complex Figure Copy Organization 10.4(3.4) 10.5(3.3) 9.6(3.4) Copy Accuracy 63.6(4.3) 63.5(3.5) 64.0(2.1) Delay Organization 7.1(3.9) 8.6(3.7) 8.2(4.1) Delay Accuracy 41.5(10.0) 51(10.4) 50.3(7.8)  
Dry mouth 4(14.8) 3(11.1) 1.0 .32 Agitation 6(22.2) 2(7.4) 4.0 .05 Fatigue 1(3.7) 1(3.7) 0.0 Ͼ .99 Indigestion 1(3.7) 2(7.4) 1.0 .32 Urinary tractinfection 1(3.7) 0(0.0) 1.0 .32 Gastrointestinal pain 1(3.7) 0(0.0) 1.0 .32

Continuous Performance Test, No. Panic attack 1(3.7) 0(0.0) 1.0 .32

Hits Omissions Late  
76.7 20.6 2.78  
84.5 14.4 1.04  
85.7† ࿣ 12.7† ࿣ 1.39  
Nausea Sinus problems Bronchitis  
1(3.7) 0(0.0) 0(0.0)  
0(0.0) 1(3.7) 1(3.7)  
1.0 1.0 1.0  
.32 .32 .32

* Values aremean(SD) unless otherwiseindicated. †Vs baselineby Wilcoxonsignedranktest. ‡ P Ͻ .05. § P Ͻ .0001. ࿣ P Ͻ .01. ¶ P Ͻ .001.  
Cough Confusion Light-headed * Using McNemarexacttest.  
0(0.0) 1(3.7) 1(3.7)  
1(3.7) 0(0.0) 0(0.0)  
1.0 1.0 1.0  
.32 .32 .32

at an average oral daily dose of 54 mg, was well tolerated and effective. Although this was a crossover design, reduction in ADHD symptoms was sufficiently robust to be detectable in a parallel group comparison duringthefirst3weeksoftheprotocol( P Ͻ .001).These results confirm the study hypothesis and suggest that Adderall is a well-tolerated and effective treatment for adults with ADHD. Although the duration of drug action was not measured directly, our results suggest that twice-daily dosing of Adderall may be comparable with methylphenidate using a thrice-daily dosing. 39 Subjects in our study indicated that twice-daily dosing was sufficient to cover theentiredayandtherewasnosubjectivesenseofmedication “wear-off” in between doses. These results extend to amphetamines other findings documenting a highly similar pattern of drug responsivity between children and adults with ADHD to anti-ADHD medications including methylphenidate, 39 pemoline, 42 desipramine, 40 tomoxetine, 41 and bupropion. 53 The similarities in drug response across the life span provide further support for the informativeness of trials of adults with ADHD in drug development programs for ADHD. Traditional analyses in clinical trials examine outcome using a cutoff score. We used a 30% cutoff of ADHD symptoms (ADHD Rating Scale) to define improvement. In another report, we have addressed the issue of cutoffs by use of a novel analytic technique, the drug-placebo response curve, that examines the entire range of symptom change scores. 54 In addition, in this study the negligible overall response to placebo was composed of individuals who improved and individuals who worsened. Another pharmacotherapy study of adults with ADHD also revealed worsening while receiving placebo. 54  
Although we evaluated a range of neuropsychologicaloutcomesusingabatteryofteststhatmeasuresexecutive functions, most subjects performed well on this battery. The relative good function at baseline is consistent with other studies showing adult ADHD to be associated withmildneuropsychologicaldeficits. 46 Thiscreateda“ceiling”effectthatdidnotallowthedetectionofmedicationassociated cognitive improvements. The development of tests that are more sensitive to neuropsychological dysfunction in ADHD adults may be required to assess fully the effect of pharmacological treatments. The absence of meaningful associations between Adderall treatment and ratings of anxiety and depression indicatethatAdderall-associatedADHDimprovementwas unlikelytobesecondarytoimprovementincomorbiddepressionoranxietyinoursample.Theyalsoindicatethat Adderall treatment was not associated with worsening of anxiety or depression in this sample that had a frequent historyofcomorbiditywiththesedisorders.Whilewedid not have sufficient statistical power to fully examine the effectsofpotentialconfoundingfactors,theabsenceofsex andcomorbidityeffectsinthetreatmentresponseofadults with ADHD is consistent with prior studies with other medications,anddoesnotsupportthepracticeofexcludingcomorbidcasesinclinicaltrialsofadultswithADHD. Although none of our subjects suffered from preexistinghypertension,patientswithpoorlycontrolledhypertension may not be eligible for stimulant treatment untiltheirbloodpressureiswellcontrolled.Specialmonitoring may be required in patients with borderline hypertension receiving Adderall or other stimulant drugs. Untilmoreisknownaboutlong-termtreatmentinadults, periodic assessment of blood pressure may be warranted in patients exposed to stimulants. The results of this study should be viewed in light of methodological limitations. These include the rela-

(REPRINTED) ARCH GEN PSYCHIATRY/VOL 58, AUG 2001 WWW.ARCHGENPSYCHIATRY.COM 780 ©2001 American Medical Association. All rights reserved. Downloaded From: http://archpsyc.jamanetwork.com/ by a University of Sussex Library User on 04/04/2016

tively small subject size, use of a crossover design, and a relatively short exposure to medication. While studies inchildrensuggestarapidresponsetostimulants,inclinical practice a more gradual dose escalation is the rule. Inourstudy,thedosewasincreasedweekly;thuswecannot disentangle dose and time effects. It is possible that continued exposure would lead to increased effectiveness of long-term Adderall treatment. While the use of a crossoverdesignprovidesincreasedstatisticalpower,the evidence of a minor carryover effect would suggest that in future studies, a longer washout period or a parallel design may be more optimal. Nevertheless, reduction in ADHD symptoms was robust enough to be detectable in a parallel group comparison. Despite their robustness, our results could not address the impact of Adderall on functioning and quality of life. Such information is critical to further inform the risk vs benefit analysis of treatment with Adderall. Longer studies with appropriate instrumentation assessing these domains will be needed to address these important issues. Despitetheselimitations,thisstudyhasshownthat AdderallsignificantlyimprovedADHDsymptomsandwas welltolerated.Thesepromisinginitialresultsprovidesupport for further studies of Adderall or other amphetamine compounds in the treatment of adult ADHD using a wide range of doses over an extended period of treatment and with more detailed assessment of functioning and quality of life. Accepted for publication October 31, 2000. SupportedinpartbyfundingfromShireRichwoodPharmaceuticals, and grant R29MH57511 from the National Institutes of Mental Health, Bethesda, Md (Dr Spencer). Preliminary results were presented at the annual meeting of the American Academy of Neurology,Toronto, Ontario, April 21, 1999, the annual meeting of the American Psychiatric Association, Washington, DC, May 20, 1999, and the annual meeting of the New Clinical Drug Evaluation Unit, Boca Raton, Fla, June 2, 1999. We thank John Vetrano, RPh, Harold Demonaco, MS, RPh, and other pharmacy staff at the Massachusetts General Hospital, and Jeff Bostic, MD, for their assistance with this project. Reprints:ThomasSpencer,MD,PediatricPsychopharmacology Unit (ACC-725), Massachusetts General Hospital, Fruit Street, Boston, MA 02114. REFERENCES 1. SpencerTJ, BiedermanJ, Wilens T, HardingM, O’DonnellD, GriffinS.Pharmacotherapyofattentiondeficithyperactivitydisorderacross thelifecycle:aliteraturereview. J AmAcadChildAdolesc Psychiatry . 1996;35:409-432. 2. WinsbergBG, Press M, BialerI, KupietzS.Dextroamphetamineandmethylphenidateinthetreatmentofhyperactive-aggressivechildren. Pediatrics . 1974;53: 236-241. 3. Arnold LE, Christopher J, Huestis R, Smeltzer DJ. Methylphenidatevs dextroamphetaminevs caffeineinminimal braindysfunction: controlledcomparison byplacebowashoutdesignwithBayes’ analysis. ArchGenPsychiatry .1978;35: 463-473. 4. PelhamWE Jr, GreensladeKE, Vodde-HamiltonM, Murphy JJ, GreensteinDA, GnagyEM,GuthrieKJ,HooverMD,DahlRE.Relativeefficacyoflong-actingstimulants onchildrenwithattentiondeficit-hyperactivity disorder: acomparisonof standard methylphenidate, sustained-release methylphenidate, sustainedreleasedextroamphetamine, andpemoline. Pediatrics . 1990;86:226-237.  
5. EliaJ, Borcherding BG, Rapoport JL, Keysor CS. Methylphenidateanddextroamphetaminetreatments of hyperactivity: aretheretruenonresponders? Psychiatry Res . 1991;36:141-155. 6. EfronD, JarmanF, BarkerM. Methylphenidateversus dexamphetamineinchildrenwithattentiondeficithyperactivitydisorder:adouble-blind,crossovertrial. Pediatrics .1997;100:e6.Availableat:http://www.pediatrics.org/cgi/content/full/ 100/6/eg. Accessibility verifiedDecember14, 2000. 7. SharpWS, Walter JM, MarshWL, RitchieGF, Hamburger SD, Castellanos FX. ADHDingirls:clinicalcomparabilityofaresearchsample. J AmAcadChildAdolesc Psychiatry . 1999;38:40-47. 8. Wilens T, BiedermanJ, SpencerT. Pharmacotherapyofattentiondeficithyperactivity disorderinadults. CNS Drugs . 1998;9:347-356. 9. PatersonR,DouglasC,HallmayerJ,HaganM,KrupeniaZ.Arandomised,doubleblind,placebo-controlledtrialofdexamphetamineinadultswithattentiondeficit hyperactivity disorder. AustNZ J Psychiatry . 1999;33:494-502. 10. RapoportJL,BuchsbaumMS,WeingartnerH,ZahnTP,LudlowC,MikkelsenEJ. Dextroamphetamine: its cognitiveandbehavioral effects innormal andhyperactiveboys andnormal men. ArchGenPsychiatry . 1980;37:933-943. 11. ArnoldLE, Strobl D, Weisenberg A. Hyperkinetic adult: study of the“paradoxical” amphetamineresponse. JAMA . 1972;222:693-694. 12. TurnerW, Carl G. Temporarychanges inaffectandattitudefollowing ingestion ofvariousamountsofBenzadrineSulfate(amphetaminesulfate). J Psychol .1939; 8:415-482. 13. Matochik JA, Liebenauer LL, King AC, Szymanski HV, Cohen RM, Zametkin AJ. Cerebral glucose metabolism in adults with attention deficit hyperactivity disorder after chronic stimulant treatment. Am J Psychiatry . 1994;151:658664. 14. HorriganJ, BarnhillL. Low-doseamphetaminesalts andadultattention-deficit/ hyperactivity disorder. J ClinPsychiatry . 2000;61:414-417. 15. SaferDJ, ZitoJM.Pharmacoepidemiologyofmethylphenidateandotherstimulantsforthetreatmentofattentiondeficithyperactivitydisorder.In:GreenhillLL, OsmanBB, eds. Ritalin: TheoryandPractice . Larchmont, NY: MaryAnnLiebert Inc; 1999. 16. Stein MA, Blondis TA, Schnitzler ER, O’Brien T, Fishkin J, Blackwell B, Szumowski E, Roizen NJ. Methylphenidate dosing: twice daily versus three times daily. Pediatrics . 1996;98(4, pt1):748-756. 17. WhitehouseD, ShahU, PalmerFB. Comparisonof sustained-releaseandstandardmethylphenidateinthetreatmentofminimalbraindysfunction. J ClinPsychiatry . 1980;41:282-285. 18. Fitzpatrick PA, KlormanR, BrumaghimJT, Borgstedt AD. Effects of sustainedreleaseand standard preparations of methylphenidateon attention deficit disorder. J AmAcadChildAdolesc Psychiatry . 1992;31:226-234. 19. PelhamWE Jr, Sturges J, Hoza J, Schmidt C, Bijlsma JJ, Milich R, Moorer S. Sustainedreleaseandstandardmethylphenidateeffects oncognitiveandsocial behavior in children with attention deficit disorder. Pediatrics . 1987;80:491501. 20. DulcanM.Usingpsychostimulants totreatbehavioraldisorders ofchildrenand adolescents. J ChildAdolesc Psychopharmacol . 1990;1:7-20. 21. Greenhill LL, HalperinJM, Abikoff H. Stimulant medications. J AmAcad Child Adolesc Psychiatry . 1999;38:503-512. 22. Greenhill LL, CooperT, SolomonM, FriedJ, CornblattB. Methylphenidatesalivary levels inchildren. Psychopharmacol Bull . 1987;23:115-119. 23. Brown GL, Ebert MH, Mikkelsen EJ, Hunt RD. Behavior and motor activity responseinhyperactivechildrenandplasmaamphetaminelevelsfollowingasustainedreleasepreparation. J AmAcadChildPsychiatry . 1980;19:225-239. 24. Marotta PJ, Roberts EA. Pemoline hepatotoxicity in children. J Pediatr . 1998; 132:894-897. 25. SwansonJM, WigalS, GreenhillLL, BrowneR, WaslikB, LernerM, Williams L, FlynnD, Agler D, Crowley K, Fineberg E, BarenM, Cantwell DP. Analog classroomassessment of adderall inchildrenwithADHD. J AmAcadChildAdolesc Psychiatry . 1998;37:519-526. 26. PelhamWE, Aronoff HR, MidlamJK, ShapiroCJ, Gnagy EM, Chronis AM, Onyango AN, Forehand G, Nguyen A, Waxmonsky J. A comparison of ritalin and adderall:efficacyandtime-courseinchildrenwithattention-deficit/hyperactivity disorder. Pediatrics . 1999;103:e43. Availableat: http://www.pediatrics.org/cgi/ content/full/103/4/e43. Accessibility verifiedDecember14, 2000. 27. ArnoldLE, Huestis RD, SmeltzerDJ, ScheibJ, WemmerD, ColnerG. Levoamphetaminevsdextroamphetamineinminimalbraindysfunction:replication,time response,anddifferentialeffectbydiagnosticgroupandfamilyrating. ArchGen Psychiatry . 1976;33:292-301. 28. FirstM,SpitzerR,GibbonM,WilliamsJ. StructuredClinicalInterviewforDSM-IV Axis IDisorders . Washington, DC: AmericanPsychiatric Press; 1997:84. 29. OrvaschelH, Puig-AntichJ. ScheduleforAffectiveDisordersandSchizophrenia forSchool-AgeChildren:EpidemiologicVersion .FortLauderdale,Fla:NovaUniversity; 1987.

(REPRINTED) ARCH GEN PSYCHIATRY/VOL 58, AUG 2001 WWW.ARCHGENPSYCHIATRY.COM 781 ©2001 American Medical Association. All rights reserved. Downloaded From: http://archpsyc.jamanetwork.com/ by a University of Sussex Library User on 04/04/2016

1. AmericanPsychiatric Association. Diagnostic andStatistical Manual of Mental Disorders, FourthEdition . Washington, DC: AmericanPsychiatric Association; 1994:1-223. 31. WechslerD. ManualfortheWechslerAdultIntelligenceScale, Revised .SanAntonio, Tex: Psychological Corp; 1981. 32. Jastak JF, Jastak S. TheWideRangeAchievement Test, Revised . Wilmington, Del: JastakAssociates; 1985. 33. Register F. Assistance to States for Education for Handicapped Children: Procedures forEvaluating Specific Learning Disabilities . Bethesda, Md: US Deptof Health, Education, andWelfare; 1977. 34. ReynoldsCR.Criticalmeasurementissuesinlearningdisabilities. J SpecialEduc . 1984;18:451-476. 35. HollingsheadAB. Four-FactorIndexofSocialStatus .NewHaven,Conn:YaleUniversity Press; 1975. 36. NationalInstituteofMentalHealth.CGI(ClinicalGlobalImpressionScale):NIMH. Psychopharmacol Bull . 1985;21:839-844. 37. DuPaulG, PowerT, AnastopoulosA, ReidR. ADHDRatingScale, IV:Checklists, Norms, andClinical Interpretation . NewYork, NY: GuilfordPress; 1998. 38. BarkleyRA. AttentionDeficitHyperactivityDisorder: AHandbookforDiagnosis andTreatment . NewYork, NY: GuilfordPress; 1990. 39. Spencer T, Wilens T, Biederman J, Faraone SV, Ablon JS, Lapey K. A doubleblind,crossovercomparisonofmethylphenidateandplaceboinadultswithchildhood-onsetattention-deficithyperactivitydisorder. ArchGenPsychiatry . 1995; 52:434-443. 40. WilensTE,BiedermanJ,PrinceJ,SpencerTJ,FaraoneSV,WarburtonR,Schleifer D, Harding M, Linehan C, Geller D. Six-week, double-blind, placebocontrolledstudyofdesipramineforadultattentiondeficithyperactivitydisorder. AmJ Psychiatry . 1996;153:1147-1153. 41. Spencer T, Biederman J, Wilens T, Prince J, Hatch M, Jones J, Harding M, Faraone SV, Seidman L. Effectiveness and tolerability of tomoxetine in adults with attention deficit hyperactivity disorder. Am J Psychiatry . 1998;155:693695. 42. Wilens TE, BiedermanJ, SpencerTJ, FrazierJ, PrinceJ, Bostic J, RaterM, Soriano J, Hatch M, Sienna M, Millstein RB, Abrantes A. Controlled trial of high  
doses ofpemolineforadults withattention-deficit/hyperactivitydisorder. J Clin Psychopharmacol . 1999;19:257-264. 43. HamiltonM.Aratingscalefordepression. J NeurolNeurosurgPsychiatry .1960; 23:56-62. 44. BeckAT, WardCE, MendelsonM, MockJ, ErbaughJ. Aninventoryformeasuring depression. ArchGenPsychiatry . 1961;4:561-571. 45. HamiltonM.Theassessmentofanxietystatesbyrating. BrJ MedPsychol .1959; 32:50-55. 46. SeidmanLJ, BiedermanJ, WeberW, HatchM, FaraoneSV.Neuropsychological functioninadults withattention-deficit hyperactivity disorder. Biol Psychiatry . 1998;44:260-268. 47. WeintraubS,MesulamMM.Mentalstateassessmentofyoungandelderlyadults inbehavioral neurology. In: MesulamMM, ed. Principles ofBehavioral Neurology . Philadelphia, Pa: FADavis Co; 1985:71-123. 48. SeidmanLJ, Breiter HC, GoodmanJM, GoldsteinJM, Woodruff PW, O’Craven K, Savoy R, Tsuang MT, RosenBR. A functional magnetic resonanceimaging studyofauditoryvigilancewithlowandhighinformationprocessing demands. Neuropsychology . 1998;12:505-518. 49. GoldenCJ. StroopColorandWordTest:AManualforClinicalandExperimental Use . Chicago, Ill: Stoelting Co; 1978. 50. SeidmanLJ, Benedict KB, BiedermanJ, BernsteinJH, Seiverd K, Milberger S, NormanD,MickE,FaraoneSV.PerformanceofchildrenwithADHDontheReyOsterriethComplexFigure:apilotneuropsychologicalstudy. J ChildPsycholPsychiatry . 1995;36:1459-1473. 51. LiangKY, ZegerSL.Longitudinaldataanalysis fordiscreteandcontinuous outcomes. Biometrics . 1986;42:121-130. 52. ZegerS, Liang K, AlbertP. Models forlongitudinal data: ageneralizedestimating equationapproach. Biometrics . 1988;44:1049-1060. 53. WilensT,SpencerT,BiedermanJ,GirardK,DoyleR,PrinceJ,SolhkhahR,Polisner D, ComeauS, ParekhMD. A controlled trial of bupropionSR for attention deficithyperactivity disorderinadults. AmJ Psychiatry . Inpress. 54. FaraoneSV, BiedermanJ, Spencer TJ, Wilens TE. Thedrug-placebo response curve: anewmethodforassessing drug effects inclinical trials. J ClinPsychopharmacol . 2000;20:673-679.

(REPRINTED) ARCH GEN PSYCHIATRY/VOL 58, AUG 2001 WWW.ARCHGENPSYCHIATRY.COM 782 ©2001 American Medical Association. All rights reserved. Downloaded From: http://archpsyc.jamanetwork.com/ by a University of Sussex Library User on 04/04/2016
