# Mixed Amphetamine Salts Extended-Release in the Tr

Original Research Mixed Amphetamine Salts ExtendedRelease in the Treatment of Adult ADHD: A Randomized, Controlled Trial By Richard H. Weisler, MD, Joseph Biederman, MD, Thomas J. Spencer, MD, Timothy E. Wilens, MD, Stephen V. Faraone, PhD, Allan K. Chrisman, MD, Stephanie C. Read, MS, and Simon J. Tulloch, MD, on behalf of the SLI381.303 Study Group ABSTRACT

Introduction: Attention-deficit/hyperactivity disorder (ADHD) is a serious neurobehavioral disorder of childhood onset that often persists into adolescence and adulthood. Functional impairments, underachievement, and difficult interpersonal relationships illustrate the need for effective treatment of ADHD through adulthood. Method:This prospective, multisite, randomized, double-blind, placebo-controlled, parallel-group, dose-escalation study was conducted to assess the efficacy, safety, and duration of action of mixed amphetamine salts extended-release (MAS XR) in adults with ADHD, combined type. Adults >18 years of age were given placebo or MAS XR 20, 40, or 60 mg/day for 4 weeks.The main outcome measures were the ADHD Rating Scale and Conners' Adult ADHD Rating Scale Short Version Self-Report (CAARS-S-S).  
FOCUS POINTS____________________ • Attention-deficit/hyperactivity disorder (ADHD) is a serious neurobehavioral disorder of childhood onset that often persists into adulthood. • Stimulants have been studied extensively in children with ADHD and have a well-established safety and efficacy profile. • Stimulants are indirect agonists of catecholaminergic transmission in the central nervous system and increase the amount of dopamine and norepinephrine available presynaptically. • In this study, mixed amphetamine salts extendedrelease (MAS XR) 20-60 mg/day were safe and effective in adults with ADHD. • Treatment response to MAS XR was related to ADHD symptom severity and a trend toward dose response for efficacy was observed for adults with higher baseline symptom severity. • MAS XR seems to have an acceptable cardiovascular safety profile in adults with ADHD. Results: Two hundred fifty-five subjects were randomly assigned to treatment with MAS XR or placebo. MAS XR treatment was associated with

Dr. Weisler is adjunct professor of psychiatry at the University of North Carolina at Chapel Hill and adjunct associate professor of psychiatry at Duke University in Durham, North Carolina. Dr. Biederman is chief of the Pediatric Psychopharmacology Research Unit at Massachusetts General Hospital (MGH) in Boston. Dr. Spencer is associate professor of psychiatry at Harvard Medical School in Boston. Dr. Wilens is associate professor of psychiatry at Harvard Medical School and director of Substance Abuse Services in Pediatric Psychopharmacology at MGH. Dr. Faraone is director of Medical Genetics Research and head of Child and Adolescent Psychiatry Research at the State University of New York Upstate Medical University in Syracuse. Dr. Chrisman is assistant clinical professor in the department of psychiatry and behavioral sciences in the division of child psychiatry at Duke University Medical Center. Ms. Read is senior medical program manager in Global Medical Affairs at Shire Pharmaceuticals Inc., in Wayne, Pennsylvania. Dr. Tulloch is head of the CNS Strategic Therapeutic Area at Shire Pharmaceuticals Inc. Disclosures and acknowledgements: Please see page 639 for all disclosure statements and acknowledgements. Submitted for publication: March 28, 2006 accepted July 1 1, 2006. Please direct all correspondence to: Richard H. Weisler, MD, 700 Spring Forest Road., Suite 125, Raleigh, NC 27609; Tel: 919-872-5900, Fax: 919-878-0942; E-mail: rweisler@aol.com .

DowntoadetkQffiTi c ity^i/wwwicaaibridg https :/www.cambridge.org/core/terms  
e.org/core . Centre Universitaire , on 23 Mar 2017 g4^18:48 . https://doi.org/10.1017/S1092852900013687  
, subject to the Cambridge Core terms of use, available at  
August 2006

Original Research

statistically and clinically significant ADHD symptom reduction at endpoint; mean ADHD Rating Scale scores were 18.5 for the 20-mg group (P=.OO1), 18.4 for the 40-mg group (P<.001), and 18.5 for the 60-mg group (Pc.001). Adults with severe symptoms (ADHD Rating Scale score >32 at baseline) had significantly greater symptom reduction with the highest MAS XR dose (60 mg/day), however, this dose-response relationship was determined by post-hoc analysis.The mean MAS XR effect size was 0.8. Statistically significant (Pc.05) improvements in CAARS-S-S ADHD index scores occurred at 4and 12-hours postdose for all MAS XR groups, indicating a 12-hour duration of effect. Symptoms improved within the first treatment week. Most adverse events reported were mild or moderate in intensity, and the most commonly reported adverse events were consistent with the known profile of stimulant medications. Vital signs and electrocardiograms showed no clinically significant cardiovascular changes. Conclusion: These results suggest that MAS XR is safe and effective in adults with ADHD and controlled ADHD symptoms for up to 12 hours. CNS Spectr. 2006;11(8):625-639 INTRODUCTION_______________________  
whether patterns of diagnosis and treatment of adult ADHD differ. Only 25% of the patients with ADHD were first diagnosed in childhood or adolescence. Although ADHD is a chronic disorder, many individuals are able to compensate until the challenges of family and career become overwhelming. In the Faraone and colleagues 8 study, >90% of adults with undiagnosed ADHD were self-referred, both in primary care and psychiatric settings, and common symptoms that motivated self-referral were general disorganization, problems with time management, a tendency to leave projects incomplete, and difficulty functioning at work. Greater than 50% of previously undiagnosed adults had complained about ADHD symptoms to other healthcare professionals in the past. Unlike the standard of care in pediatrics, adults are not routinely screened for ADHD in primary care. Lack of training and uncertainty about the diagnosis likely contribute to the underrecognition of the disorder in adults. Clinical, family, psychopharmacologic, neurobiologic, neuropsychological, and outcome studies support the validity of adult ADHD. 9 Neuroimaging studies 1011 indicate a profile of prefrontal dopaminergic hypoactivity in both adult and childhood ADHD. The core symptoms of ADHD—inattentiveness, impulsivity, and hyperactivity—are well documented in adult ADHD, although hyperactivity symptoms tend to diminish with age. 1213 Similar functional impairments, such as educational or occupational underachievement and difficult interpersonal relationships, affect both children and adults with ADHD. 1416 Compared with ageand gender-matched individuals, teenagers and young

Attention-deficit/hyperactivity disorder adults with ADHD are >4 times as likely to have

(ADHD) is a serious neurobehavioral disorder of childhood onset that often persists into adolescence and adulthood. Estimates of the prevalence and persistence of ADHD vary depending on the diagnostic criteria used and definitions of persistence. 1 Based on Diagnostic and Statistical Manual of Mental Disorders, Fourth Edition, Text Revision (DSM-IV-TR) criteria, 2 -10% of schoolaged youth worldwide are affected by ADHD 3 5 and 4.4% of adults in the United States have ADHD. 6 With 209 million adults >18 years of age and a 4.4% prevalence rate, >9 million adults in the US may have ADHD. 7 Faraone and colleagues 8 surveyed primary care and psychiatry practices to determine  
automobile accidents. 17 Significantly fewer adults with ADHD had attended college, twice as many had been divorced, and half as many were completely satisfied with their professional lives and career tracks. 16 These life impairments illustrate the need for effective treatment of ADHD throughout the lifespan. Stimulant medications have been studied extensively in children with ADHD and have a well-established safety and efficacy profile. Research suggests that adults with ADHD respond well to stimulants when adequate doses are used. 1819 A number of once-daily extendedrelease (XR) stimulant formulations have been developed recently and are likely to increase

Downloaded Jrom - htU) s/wwwv.cawbridge.org/core . Centre Universitaire , on 23 Mar 2017 atl9;18:48 , subject to the Cambridge Core terms of use, available at https/www.canwria^e.oFg/core/rerms . https://doi.org/10.1017/S1092852900013687 OZO  
August 2006

Original Research

treatment compliance, 20 particularly in a population that tends to be forgetful and disorganized. Additionally, XR formulations may reduce the abuse potential compared with immediaterelease (IR) formulations. 2122 Mixed amphetamine salts XR (MAS XR) capsules contain a 1:1 ratio of immediate-todelayed-release MAS pellets.The pharmacokinetic profile of one MAS XR 20-mg capsule is equivalent to that of two MAS IR 10-mg tablets dosed 4-6 hours apart. 23 The safety profile and rapid onset of action of MAS XR are similar to those of the IR tablets, but the long-acting formulation provides a persistent 12-hour therapeutic effect with once-daily dosing. 2425 A linear pharmacokinetic profile for MAS XR 20 mg, 40 mg, and 60 mg/day has been demonstrated in healthy adults. 26 This randomized, doubleblind, placebo-controlled, forced-dose-escalation study was designed to assess the efficacy and safety of MAS XR 20, 40, and 60 mg/day in adults with ADHD. We hypothesized that MAS XR would reduce ADHD symptoms significantly in adults and that higher doses would lead to greater symptom improvement. METHODS Subjects and Eligibility Criteria Subjects were outpatients >18 years of age who were referred by clinics and had a primary diagnosis of ADHD established by psychiatric evaluation using DSM-IV-TR criteria. 2 Diagnosis required identification of at least six of nine symptoms for hyperactive/impulsive and inattentive subtype criteria and ADHD onset by 7 years of age. Subjects were in good physi-  
(14-item Hamilton Rating Scale for Anxiety score >17). Subjects were excluded for a positive drug screen or substance abuse history (or living with someone with a substance abuse disorder); glaucoma; hyperthyroidism; seizure, tic disorder, orTourette syndrome; and pregnancy or lactation. Also excluded were subjects who were taking within 30 days of the screening visit any anticonvulsant drugs, clonidine, guanfacine, systemic steroids, medications that affect blood pressure (BP) or the heart or have central nervous system effects, pemoline, or investigational drugs. Study Design This was a multisite, randomized, doubleblind, placebo-controlled, parallel-group study designed to assess the efficacy and safety of three doses of MAS XR in adults with ADHD. The study was conducted between February 6, 2002, and May 24, 2002. Eligible subjects were randomly assigned (3 active:1 placebo) to a daily morning dose of MAS XR 20 mg, 40 mg, or 60 mg for 4 weeks (Figure 1).This was a forceddose-escalation design and dosage modification was not permitted; subjects were excluded if sustained drug intolerance occurred. FIGURE 1. Study design Baseline Visit Screening and procedures randomization ! Week 1 Week 2 | Week 3 | Week 4 | fl CAARS fl CAARS fl CAARS fl CAARS fl CAARS fl

cal health, with normal vital signs and 12-lead SCID ADHD-RS ADHD-RS ADHD-RS ADHD-RS ADHD-RS

electrocardiogram (ECG) measurements.This study complied with institutional review board regulations and the Declaration of Helsinki,  
KBIT CGI-S CGI-I CGI-I CGI-I CGI-I HAM-A HAM-A CGI-E CGI-E CGI-E CGI-E HAM-D HAM-D Safety Safety Safety Safety Safety Safety

2000 revision. Each subject provided written, informed consent after study procedures and  
I  
Placebo MAS XR 20 mg/day

objectives were disclosed. Subjects incapable of following study instruc-  
20 mg/day 20 mg/day  
MAS XR 40

tions or having an intelligence quotient <80 (Kaufman Brief Intelligence Test) were excluded from the study. Several comorbid psychiatric diagnoses were excluded: psychosis, bipolar illness, pervasive developmental disorder, severe obsessive-compulsive disorder, and severe depressive (17-item Hamilton Rating Scale for Depression score >19) and anxiety disorders  
CAARS=Conners' Adult ADHD Rating Scale; SCID=Structured Clinical Interview for the Diagnostic and Statistical Manual of Mental Disorders, Fourth Edition; ADHD-RS=Attention-Deficit/Hyperactivity Disorder Rating Scale; KBIT=Kaufman Brief Intelligence Test; CGI-S=Clinical Global Impressions-Severity; CGI-l=Clinical Global Impressions-lmprovement; HAM-A=Hamilton Rating Scale for Anxiety; CGI-E=Global ImpressionsEfficacy; HAM-D=Hamilton Rating Scale for Depression; MAS XR=mixed amphetamine salts extended-release. Weisler RH, Biederman J, Spencer TJ, Wilens TE, Faraone SV, Chrisman AK, Read SC, Tulloch SJ. CNS Spectr. Vol 11, No 8. 2006.

Downloaded QhtW/www.< arftbridge.org/core . Centre Universitaire , on 23 Mar 2017 at 4348:48 , subject to the Cambridge Core terms of use, available at https:/wwwxamDriage®r^/core/terms . https://doi.org/10.1017/S1092852900013687 ®  
August 2006

Original Research

Measurements Primary Efficacy Assessments Investigators completed the ADHD Rating Scale to assess the 18 individual symptom criteria of ADHD in DSM-IV-TR at baseline and at each clinic visit. The ADHD Rating Scale is composed of two subscales, inattentive and hyperactive/impulsive; all items were scored on a 4-point scale from 0 (no symptoms) to 3 (severe symptoms). Secondary Efficacy Assessments Conners' Adult ADHD Rating Scale-Short Version-Self-Report (CAARS-S-S) was used to determine the duration of MAS XR action. Each item was scored on a 4-point scale, from 0 (not at all, never) to 3 (very much, very frequently). The five CAARS-S-S subscales include the 12item ADHD index and 4-factor-derived, 5-item scales. The CAARS-S-S ADHD index measures the overall level of ADHD-related symptoms using items that capture daily symptomatology, such as "I have a short fuse/hot temper," "I am always on the go,” "I feel restless even when sitting still," and "Things I hear or see distract me from what I'm doing." Using an interactive voice-response system, subjects completed the CAARS-S-S at 4and 12-hours postdose 3 days/ week during the washout week and each of the 4 treatment weeks. The Clinical Global Impressions-Severity (CGI-S), -Improvement (CGI-I), and -Efficacy (CGI-E) scales were used to determine overall improvement over time. The CGI-S is a crosssectional assessment of the severity of illness using a 7-point scale and was assessed at baseline and end point.The CGI-I (also a 7-point scale) provides a longitudinal assessment of overall symptom improvement relative to baseline and was measured weekly during the 4 treatment weeks. Investigators also completed the CGI-E weekly. The CGI-E consists of two items (Therapeutic Effects and Side Effects), each of which is a 4-point scale intended specifically to capture medication effects. Safety Assessments Safety was assessed through physical examination, neurologic evaluation, vital sign measurements, and clinical laboratory test results. A 12-lead ECG, performed at baseline and 2-week intervals, was evaluated for safety by the investigator but was analyzed for ECG measures by a central laboratory. Spontaneously reported  
adverse events (AEs) were recorded weekly using Coding Symbols for a Thesaurus of Adverse Reaction Terms (COSTART) 27 terminology. Statistical Analysis Determination of Sample Size An enrollment of 200 subjects was required to detect a standardized treatment difference of 0.60 between any MAS XR group and the placebo group at 80% power (type I error=.05) using a 2-sided t-test. Randomization Eligible subjects were randomly assigned to one of the four double-blind treatment groups (MAS XR 20, 40, or 60 mg/day or placebo) in a 1:1:1:1 ratio using a block randomization schedule. Each site initially received treatment kits in two complete blocks (eg, eight pre-numbered drug kits); additional kits were provided in complete blocks as needed.The clinical study coordinator at each site assigned eligible subjects the next available randomization number in ascending order. Statistical tests were completed to determine whether the counts (Cochran-MantelHaenszel [CMH] test) and means (F test) for demographic and baseline characteristics were similar across treatment groups. Analyses were performed using SAS statistical software, version 6.12 or higher. 28 Efficacy results were analyzed on the intent-to-treat (ITT) sample (all subjects assigned to treatment with at least one valid post-baseline ADHD Rating Scale total score). Safety results were analyzed for all subjects assigned to treatment. For all measures, the endpoint was defined as the last valid postbaseline observation (numerically equivalent to a last observation-carried forward analysis). Primary Efficacy Analysis For the ADHD Rating Scale total score at endpoint, an analysis of covariance (ANCOVA) was performed, with treatment and site as fixed effects and the baseline score as a covariate. Dunnett's test was used to compare each active treatment group with placebo if an overall treatment effect was detected.This model was also applied to ADHD Rating Scale total scores at each treatment week and the ADHD Rating Scale subscale scores at endpoint. Effect size for the ADHD Rating Scale total score at endpoint was calculated as the mean treatment difference for MAS XR versus placebo divided by the pooled standard deviation.

Download@|<|(gn$0t^6yjivv^vvlcag) bridge.org/core . Centre Universitaire , on 23 Mar 2017 $28 18:48 > subject to the Cambridge Core terms of use, available at August 2006 https/www.cambridge.org/core/terms . https://doi.org/10.1017/S1092852900013687

Original Research

Secondary Efficacy Analyses Endpoint CAARS-S-S ADHD index scores were analyzed using an ANCOVA model, with treatment and site as fixed effects and the average baseline ADHD index score as a covariate. For significant overall treatment effects, pairwise comparisons were performed using a closed-testing procedure: a t-test between the least-squares means of the MAS XR 60-mg and placebo groups was performed first; if a significant difference was detected, the same test was performed for the 40-mg and 20-mg groups. To determine the treatment effect at 4and 12-hours postdose, a similar analysis was performed for both postdose ADHD index scores at endpoint. A dichotomized variable was created for the CGI-I: the "improved" category included subjects "very much improved" and "much improved"; the "not improved" category included all other ratings. For placebo and active treatment pairs, the dichotomized CGI-I at endpoint was analyzed for differences using a CMH test adjusted for site.The CGI-S and CGIE results were summarized as categorical variables (n, % for each rating). Post-Hoc Efficacy Analyses To further investigate the dose-response relationship between ADHD Rating Scale scores and actual final dose (adjusted for final dose duration and baseline severity), a 1-way ANCOVA was performed. Actual dose was the effect, and baseline ADHD Rating Scale total score was a covariate.The difference in ADHD Rating Scale change from baseline among the active doses was assessed for each treatment week. Actual dose refers to the final dose achieved, which in some cases was less than the dose assigned by randomization. Because this was a forced-dose-escalation design, subjects assigned to higher doses did not achieve their final assigned dose until midway through the study. Some subjects may have withdrawn from the study before reaching the assigned dose. The model included the placebo dose to address the issue of minimum effective dose. Analyses were performed on ITT subjects segregated by the median baseline ADHD Rating Scale score: <32 (mild) and >32 (severe). The median baseline score was chosen to provide similar sample sizes for this analysis. The linear association between final MAS XR dose at each treatment week and the propor-  
tion of subjects rated "very much improved" or "much improved" on the CGI-I scale was analyzed using the Mantel-Haenszel x 2 test. Safety Analyses Treatment-emergent AEs were summarized by body system, preferred term, and treatment group. Because the same subject may have reported the same AE when receiving different doses of MAS XR in this forced-dose-escalation design, the counts (and percentages) of AEs by treatment group are not independent observations.This lack of independence could affect the variability and would invalidate a test that assumes independence of the proportions. Because there is no methodology for a statistical test for linear trends in proportions where the proportions are dependent, no statistical test for a dose relationship for AEs was conducted. An ANCOVA model with treatment as a fixed effect and baseline as a covariate was fitted to the laboratory, vital sign, and ECG interval data for each visit. For statistically significant treatment effects, Dunnett's test assessed which active-treatment groups differed significantly from the placebo group. ECGs included interval measurements (RR interval, PR, QRS, QT, QTcB [Bazett correction], heart rate) and tracing interpretations (rhythm, conduction, morphology, myocardial infarction, ST segments,T waves, U waves). Post-Hoc Safety Analyses Outlier analyses of safety measures, including AE reports, vital signs, and ECGs (including QTcF [Fridericia correction]) were completed to further investigate the dose-response relationship for safety measures. Individual BP measurements >140 mmHg for systolic or >90 mmHg for diastolic on two consecutive visits were considered clinically significant. 28 A predefined limit of >110 beats per minute was considered clinically significant for individual pulse measurements. Individual changes in QT or QTcF intervals >60 milliseconds relative to baseline values were considered clinically noteworthy. 30 RESULTS Study Sample Eighteen study sites screened 339 adults, and 259 subjects entered the washout phase of the study; 255 were randomly assigned to treatment, and 248 were included in the ITT sample (Figure 2).

Downloaded Stp^g^ wyy.faigbridge.org/core . Centre Universitaire , on 23 Mar 2017 ^^^8:48 , subject to the Cambridge Core terms of use, available at August 2006 https:/www.cambridge.org/core/terms . https://doi.org/10.1017/S1092852900013687

Original Research

Treatment groups were similar with respect to demographic and baseline symptom severity data (Table 1).The only statistically significant group difference observed in demographic or baseline characteristics occurred for previousstimulant exposure, whereby the placebo group had a significantly lower overall exposure than the three active-treatment groups.  
Subjects, predominantly white males, ranged in age from 18-76 years.The mean time since ADHD diagnosis was 5.5 years. Mean baseline ADHD Rating Scale total scores ranged from 31-33. The mean CAARS-S-S ADHD index scores ranged from 20-23. Greater than 75% of subjects were stimulant naive.

TABLE 1. Demographic Characteristics and Baseline Symptom Severity of the ITT Sample* MAS XR Assigned Dose

Placebo (n=60)  
20 mg/day ln=64)  
40 mg/day ln=64)  
60 mg/day (n=60)  
V-value

Aae Group, n 1%) .89’

18-29 14(23) 18(28) 15(23) 12(20)

30-39 17(28) 14(22) 20 (31) 21 (35)

40-49 17(28) 20(31) 17(27) 13(22)

a50 17(20) 12(19) 12(19) 14(23)

Mean age (range) 39.3(18-59) 38.8(19-65) 38.9 (20-68) 39.9(18-76) .93*

Sex. n 1%) .16*

Male 41 (68) 41 (64) 38 (59) 29 (48)

Race. n(%) .66’

White 54 (90) 56 (87) 58 (91) 53 (88)

Black 3(5) 3(5) 2(3) 0

Hispanic 2(3) 4(6) 2(3) 5(8)

Other 1 (2) 1 (2) 2(3) 2(3)

Years since diaanosis. mean±SD 5.0+7.2 4.6±6.8 4.9±8.6 7.1±10.2 .31’

Previous stimulant exoosure. n (%) 8(13) 15(23) 17(27) 15(25) .04’

CGI-S. n (%! .89’

Mild 1 (2) 4(6) 3(5) 3(5)

Moderate 33 (55) 36 (56) 41 (64) 33 (55)

Marked 23 (38) 20(31) 18(28) 22(37)

Severe 3(5) 4(6) 2(3) 2(3)

ADHD-RS. mean±SD Total score  
33.0+8.8  
31.1±9.6  
31.3±8.1  
32.9±9.8  
.45’

Inattentive score 18.9±4.8 17.8±5.4 18.0+5.0 18.2±6 1 .57’

Hyperactive/impulsive score 14.1±6.2 13.4+6.0 13.3±5.3 14.7+5.5 .43’

CAARS-S-S ADHD Index score, 22.4±5.7 21.6±5.8 20.2±5.4 22.6±5.4 .12*

mean±SD * Some of the percentages may not equal 100 due to rounding. t Based on the Cochran-Mantel-Haenszel statistic, with adjustment for center. t Based on the F test, using a model that included center and treatment group. ITT=intent-to-treat; MAS XR=mixed amphetamine salts extended-release; CG l-S=Clinical Global Impressions-Severity; ADHD-RS=Attention-Deficit/Hyperactivity Disorder Rating Scale; CAARS-S-S=Conners' Adult ADHD Rating Scale Short Version Self-Report. Weisler RH, Biederman J, Spencer TJ, Wilens TE, Faraone SV, Chrisman AK, Read SC, Tulloch SJ. CNS Spectr. Vol 11, No 8. 2006. DownLoadfd^®TiS f ht4i>£f / iwv} v 4 c -^ fi lbr idge.org/core . Centre Universitaire , on 23 Mar 2O17X1TA18:48 , subject to the Cambridge Core terms of use, available at Aunusf 2006 httpsywww.cambridge.org/core/terms . https//doi.org/10.1017/S1092852900013687

Original Research

Efficacy Primary Efficacy ADHD Rating Scale Total Scores A 2-way analysis of variance (ANOVA) showed no difference in baseline scores across treatment groups <F 3 227=-87; P=.456). All MAS XR groups had improved ADHD Rating Scale total scores at endpoint (F 32 26= 7 - 61 ; P<-001; ANOVA for a treatment effect). However, the active-treatment groups improved nearly two fold compared with  
placebo (Table 2).The MAS XR 60-mg group had the greatest improvement in mean ADHD Rating Scale total scores. Mean ADHD Rating Scale inattentive subscale scores showed a statistically significant treatment effect (F 32 26=G-89, P<.001). Dunnett's test detected significantly improved inattentive subscale scores for each MAS XR group compared with placebo. However, there was no dose-response effect (Table 2). Likewise, there was a statistically significant treatment effect

TABLE 2. Efficacy Outcomes

MAS XR Assigned Dose ANOVA’

Measure  
20 mg/day (n=64)  
40 mg/day (n=64)  
60 mg/day (n=60)  
F  
df P-va/ue

ADHD-RS Total Score 7.61 3, 226 <001

Endpoint mean+SD 18.5+12.5 18.4+11.5 18.5±11.7

Placebo-adjusted difference (95% Cl)  
-6.6 (-11.Oto -2.3)  
-7.2 (-11.5 to -2.8)  
-7.8 (-12.2 to -3.4)

P-value .001 <.001 <.001

ADHD-RS Inattentive Score 6.89 3, 226 <.001

Endpoint mean±SD 10.7+7.4 10.3+7.3 10.0±7.3

Placebo-adjusted difference (95% Cl)  
-3.5 (-6.1 to -0.9)  
-4.1 (-6.7 to -1.5)  
-4.5 (-7.2 to -1.9)

P-value .005 .001 <001

ADHD-RS HvDeractive/lnwulsive Score 6.23 3, 226 <.001

Endpoint mean±SD 7.8±6 8.0±5.3 8.5±5.3

Placebo-adjusted difference (95% Cl)  
-3.1 (-5.2 to -1.0)  
-3.0 (-5.1 to -0.9)  
-3.3 (-5.4 to -1.3)

P-value .001 .002 .001

CAARS-S-S ADHD Index Score 4 (ranae: 2-6) Hours Postdose 5.04 3,198 .002

Endpoint mean±SD 14.9±7.2 14.6±6.8 14.7+6.7

Placebo-adjusted difference (95% Cl)  
-3.4 (-5.7 to -1.2)  
-2.7 (-5.1 to -0.4)  
-4.4 (-6.7 to -2.1)

P-value .004 .021 <.001

CAARS-S-S ADHD Index Score 12 (ranae: 10-14) Hours Postdose 6.34 3,194 <001

Endpoint mean±SD 15.3+7.2 14.3±6.8 14.3±6.5

Placebo-adjusted difference (95% Cl)  
-3.3 (-5.6 to -ID  
-3.2 (-5.4 to -0.9)  
-4.9 (-7.1 to -2.6)

P-value .004 .006 <.001

*Last observation carried forward for the ITT sample. tDunnett's method for multiple comparisons used for the construction of 95% Cis and P-values. MAS XR=mixed amphetamine salts extended-release; ANOVA=analysis of variance; ADHD-RS=Attention-Deficit/Hyperactivity Disorder Rating Scale; CAARS-SS=Conners'Adult ADHD Rating Scale Short Version Self-Report; ITT=intentto treat. Weisler RH, Biederman J, Spencer TJ, Wilens TE, Faraone SV, Chrisman AK, Read SC, Tulloch SJ. CNS Spectr. Vol 11, No 8. 2006. DownloadGht&i SjUBCfF^lcs 6 bridge.org/core . Centre Universitaire , on 23 Mar 2017 43^18:48 , subject to the Cambridge Core terms of use, available at August 2006 https/www.cambridge.org/core/terms . https://doi.org/10.1017/S1092852900013687

Original Research

for mean ADHD Rating Scale hyperactive/impulsive subscale scores (F 3 226 =6.23; P<.001), and Dunnett's test detected significantly improved scores for each MAS XR group compared with placebo, but a doseresponse effect was not noted (Table 2).  
Post-Hoc Analysis by Baseline Severity Of the subjects with severe baseline symptoms (ADHD Rating Scale total score >32), those receiving MAS XR 60 mg/day improved significantly compared with the placebo group

FIGURE 2. Subject flow chart: all subjects with at least 1 valid postbaseline primary efficacy assessment I 339 Adults Screened I 259 Entered 1-week Washout Phase | 4 Protocol Deviations - ] Randomization safety sample

Placebo n=64  
MAS XR 20 mg/day n=66  
MAS XR 40 mg/day n=64  
MAS XR 60 mg/day n=61

22 Withdrew from Study 14 Lack of Efficacy 4 Withdrew Consent 2 Lost to Follow-up 1 Adverse Event 1 Protocol Deviation  
19 Withdrew from Study 9 Adverse Event 5 Lack of Efficacy 4 Lost to Follow-up 1 Protocol Deviation  
I 15 Withdrew from Study 6 Adverse Event 6 Lack of Efficacy 1 Lost to Follow-up 1 Withdrew Consent 1 Protocol Deviation  
16 Withdrew from Study 8 Adverse Event 4 Lack of Efficacy 3 Lost to Follow-up 1 Withdrew Consent

-------------- 1 ------ ITT Efficacy Analysis n=60  
ITT Efficacy Analysis n=64  
1 ITT Efficacy Analysis n=64  
ITT Efficacy Analysis n=60

MAS XFUmixed amphetamine salts extended-release; ITT-intent-to-treat. Weisler RH, Biederman J, Spencer TJ, Wilens TE, Faraone SV, Chrisman AK, Read SC, Tulloch SJ. CNS Spectr. Vol 11, No 8. 2006. TABLE 3. Summary and Analysis of Dichotomized CGI-I at Endpoint*

Dichotomized CGI-I Category  
Placebo (n=60)  
MAS XR 20 mg/day hi=64)  
MAS XR 40 mg/day (n=64)  
MAS XR 60 mg/day (n=60)  
P-value'

Improved 16(27%) 32 (50%) 36 (56%) 35 (58%) <.001

Not improved 44 (73%) 32 (50%) 28 (44%) 25 (42%)

Difference* N/A 23% 30% 32%

P-value (CMH) 5 N/A .012 <.001 <.001

* Last observation carried forward for the ITT sample. t Based on the nonzero correlation CMH statistic with adjustment for center. t Difference in the percentage of MAS XR subjects who were improved compared with placebo subjects. § With adjustment for center, comparing the percentage of subjects categorized as improved for each MAS XR group with the placebo group. CGI-l=Clinical Global Impressions-lmprovement; MAS XR=mixed amphetamine salts extended-release; N/A=not applicable; CMH=Cochran-Mantel-Haenszel; ITT=intent to treat. Weisler RH, Biederman J, Spencer TJ, Wilens TE, Faraone SV, Chrisman AK, Read SC, Tulloch SJ. CNS Spectr. Vol 11, No 8. 2006. Download@tM(§n SfjWCfFvvjwIcegibridge.org/core . Centre Universitaire , on 23 Mar 2017 $32 18;48 .subject to the Cambridge Core terms of use, available at August 2006 https:/www.cambridge.org/core/terms . https://doi.org/10.1017/S1092852900013687

1—1  
Original Research

(mean point difference: -11.1; P=.0007) and the 20-mg group (-8.2; P=. 001); improvement approached statistical significance compared with the 40-mg group (-5.2; P=.1O), suggesting a trend toward a linear dose-response relationship (Figure 3). For subjects with severe symptoms who were receiving MAS XR 40 mg/day, the change in mean ADHD Rating Scale scores at week 4 approached statistical significance compared with the placebo group (-5.9; P=.O6) but not the 20-mg group (-3.0; P=.34).The change in ADHD Rating Scale scores for subjects with severe symptoms who were receiving MAS XR 20 mg/day was not statistically different from the change for subjects receiving placebo (-2.9; P=.36). Clinical improvement, defined as at least a 30% reduction in ADHD Rating Scale total scores, was substantially higher in the subjects receiving active treatment than in those receiving placebo. Of those who completed the study, 61% receivFIGURE 3. Least-squares mean differences in ADHDRS total scores for MAS XR compared with placebo at week 4 (actual dose) by baseline ADHD symptom severity. This analysis indicates a dose-response effect for subjects with more severe ADHD  
ing placebo achieved at least a 30% reduction in ADHD Rating Scale total scores compared with 74%, 80%, and 82% of subjects receiving MAS XR 20, 40, and 60 mg/day, respectively. Secondary Efficacy CAARS-S-S ADHD Index ANOVA indicated a statistically significant treatment effect for the 4-hour postdose CAARS-S-S ADHD index (F 3 198 =5.04; P=.OO2) and the 12-hour postdose CAARS-S-S ADHD index (F 3 194 =6.34; Pc.001) (Table 2). The endpoint CAARS-S-S ADHD index scores were similar (14-15 unit points for all MAS XR groups) at 4and 12-hours postdose, suggesting that MAS XR has a 12-hour duration of effect in adults with ADHD, although this should be considered a preliminary finding since the CAARSS-S ADHD index is not a validated measure of diurnal symptom change. At both 4and 12hours postdose, all MAS XR groups were statistically significantly improved compared with placebo on the CAARS-S-S ADHD index, but dose-response relationships did not occur at either time point (Table 2). - ------------------------------------------------------------------------------- TABLE 4. AEs Reported by at Least 10% of Subjects in Any Treatment Group" MAS XR Assigned Dose

AE (COSTART Term), n (%)  
Placebo (n=64)  
20 mg/ day (n=66)  
40 mg/ day (n=64)  
60 mg/ day (n=61)

Dry mouth 3(5) 16(24) 28(44) 23 (38)

Anorexia 2(3) 13(20) 27 (42) 23 (38)

Insomnia 8(13) 14(21) 19(30) 16(26)

Headache 8(13) 9(14) 19(30) 16(26)

Nervousness 8(13) 7(11) 10(16) 7(12)

Weight loss 0 3(5) 10(16) 7(12)

Nausea 1 (2) 5(8) 5(8) 6(10)

Agitation 3(5) 5(8) 4(6) 6(10)

Anxiety 2(3) 4(6) 4(6) 6(10)

* Pc.0001 vs placebo. t P<.0005 vs placebo. t P=.0007 vs placebo § P=.O101 vs placebo. ADHD-RS=Attention-Deficit/Hyperactivity Rating Scale; MAS XR=mixed amphetamine salts extended-release. Weisler RH, Biederman J, Spencer TJ, Wilens TE, Faraone SV, Chrisman AK, Read SC, Tulloch SJ. CNS Spectr. Vol 11, No 8. 2006.  
*AEs considered possibly or probably related to study medication for all subjects who received at least one dose of study medication. Because this was a forced-dose-escalation design over a 4-week period, subjects may have reported the same AE more than once and at more than one MAS XR dose. MAS XR=mixed amphetamine salts extended-release; AEs=adverse events; COSTART=Coding Symbols for a Thesaurus of Adverse Reaction Terms. Weisler RH, Biederman J, Spencer TJ, Wilens TE, Faraone SV, Chrisman AK, Read SC, Tulloch SJ. CNS Spectr. Vol 11, No 8. 2006.

Download^ JfcJjgi S^^fjv' A l A 'T?@ bridge.org/core . Centre Universitaire , on 23 Mar 2017 g33 18;48 > subject to the Cambridge Core terms of use, available at August 2006 https/www.cambridge.org/core/terms . https://doi.org/10.1017/S1092852900013687

Original Research

Clinical Global Impressions Only 27% of placebo subjects experienced robust improvement (endpoint CGI-I score of 1 or 2 ["very much improved" or "much improved"]) compared with 55% of subjects receiving MAS XR (103/188). The nonzero correlation CMH statistic showed a statistically significant correlation (Pc.OOl) between dose and the percentage of subjects considered improved by investigators (includes ratings of "very much improved" or "much improved" on the CGI-I scale) (Table 3).The post-hoc analysis of CGI-I indicated that, at week 2, when subjects assigned to the 40and 60-mg groups received 40 mg/day, the linear relationship between dose and proportion of subjects considered improved was statistically significant (P=.O3). At weeks 3 and 4, when subjects were receiving assigned doses (20, 40, or 60 mg/day) according to the forced-dose-escalation design, the association between MAS XR dose and the proportion of subjects who were improved was statistically significant (P=.01 and P=.04, weeks 3 and 4, respectively [Figure 4]).These findings demonstrate a clear dose-response for efficacy as measured by the CGI-I. FIGURE 4. Linear dose-response relationship for the proportion of subjects rated by investigators as improved (includes "very much improved" and "much improved") on the CGI-I scale at week 4 (actual MAS XR dose). The linear dose-response trend is statistically significant (P=.O4 by the Mantel-Haenszel x 2 test)  
Substantially more subjects receiving MAS XR 20 mg/day (56%), 40 mg/day (59%), or 60 mg/day (60%) reported either "marked—vast improvement" or "moderate—decided improvement" on the CGI-E Therapeutic Effects scale than did subjects receiving placebo (25%). There was a suggestion of a doseresponse effect as the proportion of subjects with "marked—vast improvement" increased with dose. Most subjects reported "none" or "do not significantly interfere with functioning" on the CGI-E Side Effects scale (placebo group: 97%; 20-mg group: 84%; 40-mg group: 84%; 60-mg group: 85%). Few subjects in any treatment group reported that side effects "outweighed therapeutic benefit" (placebo group: 3%; 20-mg group: 6%; 40-mg group: 6%; and 60-mg group: 5%).The post-hoc dose-response analysis of the CGI-E data suggested that there were significantly fewer side effects relative to therapeutic improvement in the higher-dose groups (x 2 (6)=21.1; P=. 002).This effect was stronger for subjects with high ADHD symptom severity at baseline. Safety All 259 subjects enrolled were included in the AE evaluation.The ITT sample (n=255) was evaluated for all other safety measures. Adverse Events No serious adverse events (AEs) were reported. The incidences of treatment-related AEs are summarized inTable 4.The most commonly reported AEs were dry mouth (27.4% of all subjects enrolled), anorexia/decreased appetite (25.5%), insomnia (23.9%), and headache (23.6%). Most AEs were mild or moderate in intensity. Insomnia was the only severe AE reported in two or more MAS XR-treated subjects (20-mg group: n=2; 40-mg group: n=3; 60-mg group: n=4). Most AEs occurred during the first treatment week. Twenty-four subjects withdrew from the study due to AEs: one (1.6%) placebo-treated subject, nine (13.6%) MAS XR 20-mg subjects, 6 (9.4%) 40-mg subjects, and eight (13.1%) 60-mg subjects (Figure 2). The most common AEs leading to discontinuation were insomnia (10 [3.9%] subjects), agitation (four [1.6%] subjects), anxiety (four 1.6%), and nervousness (four 1.6%). Three subjects were withdrawn from the study

n=71 n=68 n = 49 due to cardiovascular AEs (two tachycardia; one

CGl-l=Clinical Global Impressions-lmprovement scale; MAS XR=mixed amphethamine salts extended-release. Weisler RH, Biederman J, Spencer TJ, Wilens TE, Faraone SV, Chrisman AK, Read SC, Tulloch SJ. CNS Specie. Vol 11, No 8. 2006.  
hypertension), one participant had increased liver enzymes, and one experienced chest pain of unclear etiology. None of the subjects required treatment for an AE.

Down[oa((e(|^-§mS|^g^/w'|v|.c : ^ ib r idge.o r g/core . Centre Universitaire , on 23 Mar 2017^^1^:18:48 .subject to the Cambridge Core terms of use, available at August 2006 https:/www.cambridge.org/core/terms . https://doi.org/10.1017/S1092852900013687

Original Research

Other Safety Assessments There was a slight decrease from baseline to endpoint in mean cholesterol (-2.4 mg/dL) for placebo, compared with larger, statistically significant (Pc.05), decreases for MAS XR 20 mg/ day (-15.5 mg/dL), 40 mg/day (-16.0 mg/dL), and 60 mg/day (-18.6 mg/dL).There was also a slight decrease in triglycerides for placebo (-1.8 mg/dL) compared with larger, statistically significant (Pc.05), decreases for MAS XR 20 mg/day (-31.0 mg/dL), 40 mg/day (-20.0 mg/dL) and 60 mg/day (-42.4 mg/dL). Changes in mean laboratory values from baseline to endpoint were otherwise small in magnitude and showed no apparent trend. Changes in individual laboratory values observed during this study seemed to be spontaneous events and, with one exception (increased liver enzymes), were not considered clinically significant. Changes in physical examinations were similar across placebo and MAS XR groups. A statistically significant treatment effect of MAS XR on weight was observed (2-way ANCOVA, Pc.001): the mean weight loss between baseline and endpoint was 1.1 ±1.8 kg for the 20-mg group (P=.O1), 2.5±2.3 kg for the 40-mg group (Pc.001), and 2.5±2.5 kg for the 60-mg group (Pc.001) compared with a mean weight gain of 0.1±2.7 kg for subjects receiving placebo. However, weight loss was not considered clinically significant in any individual subject. Vital Signs Mean changes in vital signs were moderate and not considered clinically meaningful. A 2way ANCOVA indicated a statistically significant treatment effect of MAS XR on pulse (P=.025) and systolic BP (P=.O15) but not on diastolic BP (P=. 135). Dunnett's test for multiple comparisons was used to further analyze mean changes in pulse and systolic BP for each MAS XR group compared with placebo. Between baseline and endpoint, mean±SD changes in pulse (beats per minute) were 4.2±9.7 (P=.582), 5.3±11.3 (P=.O53), 6.2±10.9 (P=.O16) in the 20-, 40-, and 60-mg groups, respectively, compared with 1.9+10.4 beats per minute for the placebo group. For systolic BP (mmHg), mean±SD changes were 0.3±11.2 (P=.191), 4.3±12.3 (P=.004), and 0.9+10.2 (P=.219) in the 20, 40-, and 60-mg groups, respectively, compared with -1.9±10.1 mmHg in the placebo group. A post-hoc outlier analysis of vital signs did not reveal a dose-response relationship for MAS XR 20 mg/day to MAS XR 60 mg/day for  
pulse, systolic BP, or diastolic BP. Only one subject in each treatment group had a pulse >110 beats per minute at any point, and changes >25 beats per minute were transitory and not dose dependent. Although MAS XR appears to have a slight effect on systolic BP, the outlier analysis did not indicate a dose-response relationship. A small number of subjects receiving placebo or MAS XR had generally transient systolic BP increases of >20 mmHg and few subjects had two consecutive measurements >140 mmHg (one, four, one, and three subjects in the placebo, 20-, 40-, and 60-mg MAS XR groups, respectively). Similarly, few subjects had diastolic BP increases of >10 mmHg from baseline and few had measurements >90 mmHg at two consecutive visits (four, three, one, and three subjects in the placebo, 20-, 40-, and 60-mg MAS XR groups, respectively). No apparent trends were identified for any of the cardiovascular measurements with respect to absolute increases from baseline or increases above the threshold values on consecutive visits. Electrocardiograms The ECG data did not suggest any clinically significant cardiovascular treatment effects associated with MAS XR in adults. The incidence of qualitative ECG abnormalities was similar for subjects receiving placebo and for subjects receiving MAS XR, and the abnormalities were either normal variants or they were of limited clinical relevance. Analyses of ECG interval measurements by 2-way ANCOVA revealed no clinically meaningful differences in PR (P=.354) or QRS (P=.204) intervals from baseline to endpoint between MAS XR (all doses) and placebo. Statistically significant treatment effects (ANCOVA) were noted for heart rate (Pc.001) and for QT (P=.OO2) and QTcB (P=.OO3) intervals.The mean changes for each treatment group were not considered clinically significant and were not statistically significant in many cases when further analyzed by dose (Dunnett's test was used for the construction of treatment group P-values).The mean changes from baseline to endpoint for heart rate (beats per minute) were -2.0±9 for the placebo group; 2.6±9 for the 20-mg group (P=.O35); 7.3±12 for the 40-mg group (Pc.001), and 4.8±11 for the 60-mg group (P<.001).The mean changes from baseline to endpoint for the QT interval (milliseconds) were 2.9±22 for the placebo group; -6.0±21 for the 20-mg group

Downloa^n^Qgri^hi^s^jwVl^ cagibridge.org/core . Centre Universitaire , on 23 Mar 2017 g^J18:48 .subject to the Cambridge Core terms of use, available at August 2006 https:/www.cambridge.org/core/terms . https://doi.org/10.1017/S1092852900013687

Original Research

(Ft.211); -11.7±25 for the 40-mg group (P=.OO1), and -7.1±21 for the 60-mg group (P=.O47). For the QTcB interval (milliseconds), mean changes from baseline to endpoint were -2.8+19 for the placebo group; 1.0±21 for the 20-mg group (Ft.101); 6.9±21 for the 40-mg group (P=.OO7), and 5.6±22 for the 60-mg group (P=.OO2). There were no apparent dose-response relationships. The post-hoc analysis using the Fridericia method of correction indicated no statistically significant change from baseline in the QTcF intervals for MAS XR (all doses) versus placebo (ANCOVA, P=.132).The mean QTcF interval changes (milliseconds) from baseline to endpoint were—1.5±16 for the 20-mg group (P=. 149);—1.1 ±21 for the 40-mg group (P=.465); and—1.1 ±19 for the 60-mg group (P=.O75). Dunnett's test was used for the construction of treatment group P-values. At endpoint, mean QT intervals did not exceed 436 milliseconds for the MAS XR groups or 433 milliseconds for the placebo group. A few 30-59 milliseconds increases were recorded, but these changes were evenly distributed across the placebo and MAS XR groups. None of the subjects in any treatment group experienced a >60 milliseconds increase in QT or QTcF intervals. DISCUSSION__________________________ In this largest adult ADHD stimulant study to date, results indicate that once-daily MAS XR 20 mg/day, 40 mg/day, and 60 mg/day doses were safe and effective in the treatment of adult ADHD, combined type. Subjects treated with MAS XR had significantly improved symptoms compared  
ADHD, because hyperactive/impulsive symptoms become less problematic in adulthood. 12 Significant improvements in ADHD Rating Scale inattentive and hyperactivity/impulsivity subscale scores were demonstrated in all MAS XR groups compared with placebo, but a dose-response effect was not observed for either subscale. As expected, daily symptom relief continued for up to 12 hours for all MAS XR doses as demonstrated by CAARS-S-S ADHD index scores. This is an important benefit for individuals with ADHD, given the potential for missed doses with multiple daily dose regimens. Additionally, compliance with XR stimulant medications is improved, 31 and the XR platform of these formulations may result in a lower abuse liability relative to IR stimulant formulations. 31 Subjects receiving MAS XR had greater improvements on all CGI measures compared with those receiving placebo. Nearly 30% of MAS XR-treated subjects achieved remission, as defined by CGI-S scores of 1 or 2 at endpoint.The CGI-I indicated statistically significant global improvements, with a clear dose response for efficacy for all MAS XR groups when analyzed by final dose. Analysis of the CGI-ETherapeutic Effects and Side Effects scales suggests that the therapeutic benefit of treatment outweighs the impact of side effects in the higher-dose groups, particularly for subjects with higher symptom severity at baseline. ADHD medications modulate the cognitive processes of attention and impulse control through effects on both dopaminergic and

with placebo, as determined by the ADHD Rating noradrenergic neurotransmitter systems. 32

Scale. Improved symptoms were detected within the first treatment week and maintained throughout the study. Although the lowest dose used in this study (20 mg/day) led to some improvement, the 40 mg/day and 60 mg/day doses led to increasing levels of efficacy.The dose-response of efficacy seemed to be related to symptom severity: adults with mild symptoms had significantly greater improvements with the lowest MAS XR dose (20 mg/day), whereas those with severe symptoms had significantly greater improvements with the highest dose (60 mg/day). The mean effect size for MAS XR 20, 40, and 60 mg/ day was 0.8 based on ADHD Rating Scale total scores at endpoint. Treatment efficacy is arguably most difficult to demonstrate in combined-type adult  
Stimulants are indirect agonists of catecholaminergic transmission in the central nervous system and increase the amount of dopamine and norepinephrine available presynaptically. 32 The differences in synaptic mechanisms of action of amphetamine and methylphenidate (MPH) may explain the differential response to these medications in some patients. 33 Both medications block the reuptake of catecholamines by binding to catecholamine reuptake transporter proteins, but amphetamine can also be transported into the nerve terminal via the transporter proteins and enhance the release of neurotransmitters stored in cytoplasmic vesicles. 34 Bupropion, atomoxetine, and tricyclic antidepressants also affect catecholaminergic transmission, although the clinical effect of

Download^l^tSn S^t^^wv^wlce^bridge-org/core • Centre Universitaire , on 23 Mar 2017 g3§18:48 https:/www.cambridge.org/core/terms . https://doi.org/10.1017/S1092852900013687  
, subject to the Cambridge Core terms of use, available at August 2006

Original Research

these medications appears to be somewhat less robust than that of stimulant medications. The average effect size of MAS XR (calculated without regard to severity of illness at baseline) was 0.8 in this study, which is similar to effect sizes reported for other studies of stimulant medications in adults with ADHD. Faraone and colleagues 36 completed a metaanalysis of six placebo-controlled studies of MPH in adults with ADHD and reported a mean effect size of 0.9. The treatment effect sizes for stimulant medications are higher than those for nonstimulant medications in adults with ADHD. An effect size of 0.6 based on ADHD Rating Scale total scores was reported for a shortterm, placebo-controlled, flexible-dose study by Wilens and colleagues 36 of an extendedrelease bupropion formulation (bupropion XL). Effect sizes of 0.35 and 0.40 based on the investigator-rated CAARS-S-S were reported for two short-term, placebo-controlled, flexible-dose atomoxetine studies. 33 Demographic characteristics and baseline symptom severity were similar for both the MAS XR and atomoxetine adult study samples, 37 whereas subjects in the bupropion XL study had more severe symptoms at baseline (mean baseline ADHD Rating Scale score of 36) and 37% of the subjects had ADHD, inattentive subtype. 36 Response rates for MAS XR (defined as >30% improvement on the ADHD Rating Scale total score at endpoint) are similar to those reported for other large, well-controlled studies in adults with ADHD. In a forced-dose-escalation study of dexmethylphenidate extendedrelease (D-MPH XR) in 221 adults, 38 response rates were 34% for placebo; 58% for D-MPH XR 20 mg/day; 54% for D-MPH XR 30 mg/day, and 61% for D-MPH XR 40 mg/day. In the Wilens and colleagues 36 study of bupropion XL in 162 adults with ADHD, ~50% of subjects achieved at least a 30% reduction in ADHD Rating Scale total scores compared with 30% of placebo subjects.The magnitude of difference in response rates for the placebo versus active groups in all these large, well-controlled, multicenter studies appears to be =20 percentage points. Higher response rates may be achieved with higher doses. In smaller (N<40), single-site studies of adults with ADHD, 18 ' 19 ' 38 response rates of 70%, 78%, and 76% have been reported for MAS IR 54 mg/day, MPH IR 0.9 mg/kg/day, and bupropion 362 mg/day, respectively.  
An MAS XR dose relationship was not established for any safety assessment. Overall, treatment-related AEs (eg, dry mouth, anorexia, insomnia, and headache) were similar in type to those reported in children. Most adults in this study were stimulant naive, which may account for the higher incidence of AEs compared with studies of children with ADHD, who typically have a history of stimulant treatment. Of note, side effects diminished rapidly over time; >40% of the treatment-emergent AEs were reported during the first week of treatment and <10% were reported during the fourth week. MAS XR appears to have an acceptable cardiovascular safety profile in adults with ADHD. Group mean changes in vital signs were not clinically significant. Individual changes in BP and pulse were sporadic and resolved spontaneously. The ECG data indicated no clinically relevant effects on ECG measurements, and no clear dose-response relationships were evident for any cardiovascular safety measures. No treatment-emergent abnormalities in cardiac conduction were found. Based on an August 2004 MAS XR product label revision 40 cautioning against the use of MAS XR in patients with structural cardiac abnormalities, Health Canada suspended the sale of MAS XR throughout Canada in February 2005. Despite the action of this regulatory agency, the Food and Drug Administration took no additional action, having concluded that the sudden death rate associated with MAS XR was no greater than that expected in patients not exposed to MAS XR. In August 2005, Health Canada reinstated the marketing authorization of MAS XR. Nevertheless, like other stimulants, the FDA labeling for MAS XR carries a warning against the misuse of amphetamine because of the risk for sudden death and serious cardiovascular adverse events. Hence, clinicians are urged to follow the recommendations of the American Heart Association 41 suggesting a careful patient history, evaluation of symptoms, and evaluation of medication use, including over-the-counter medications, with the detection of symptoms or risk factors prompting a cardiovascular examination, prior to being prescribed MAS XR or any other stimulant medication, in light of the potential for significant increases in heart rate and BP associated with amphetamines in a small percentage of patients. 41

Download^ fs^gi $lWg^fw^ai@t> ridge.org/core . Centre Universitaire , on 23 Mar 2017 ^T^L8 ; 48 .subject to the Cambridge Core terms of use, available at August 2006

https/www.cambridge.org/core/terms . https://doi.org/10.1017/S1092852900013687

Original Research

Limitations of this 4-week study relate priat: http://factfinder.census.gov/servlet/QTTable?_bm=n&*lang=en&qr*

marily to the diagnostic criteria for adult ADHD, combined type. Because many adults with ADHD are below the diagnostic threshold for hyperactivity/impulsivity, the study sample (ADHD, combined type) may not be representative of the general adult ADHD sample. In addition, the forced-dose-escalation study design may have underestimated efficacy because subjects assigned to higher doses did not achieve their final assigned dose until midway through the study, or overestimated side effects because AE reports were cumulative for all doses. CONCLUSION_________________________ This short-term, placebo-controlled, forceddose-escalation study found that once-daily doses of MAS XR 20 mg, 40 mg, and 60 mg were safe and effective in adults with ADHD. Treatment response based on post-hoc analysis was related to ADHD symptom severity: MAS XR 20 mg/day was effective for subjects with low symptom severity at baseline, and a trend toward dose response for efficacy was observed for adults with higher baseline symptom severity. All doses of MAS XR adequately controlled ADHD symptoms for up to 12 hours and were well tolerated, with no evidence of a dose-response relationship for safety assessments. Because treatment response appears to depend on baseline symptom severity, MAS XR should be dosed to optimal efficacy based on an objective symptom rating scale. Additional research is needed to document whether these short-term benefits are sustained during longterm treatment. CNS REFERENCES_________________________ 1. Barkley RA. Developmental course, adult outcome, and clinic-referred ADHD adults. In: Barkley RA, ed. Attention Deficit Hyperactivity Disorder: A Handbook for Diagnosis and Treatment. New York, NY: Guilford Press; 1998:186-224. 2. Diagnostic and Statistical Manual of Mental Disorders. 4th ed. text rev. Washington, DC: American Psychiatric Association; 2000. 3. Clinical practice guideline: diagnosis and evaluation of the child with attention-deficit/hyperactivity disorder. American Academy of Pediatrics. Pediatrics. 2000;105:1158-1170. 4. Rowland AS, Umbach DM, Stallone L, Naftel J, Bohlig M, Sandler DP. Prevalence of medication treatment for attention deficit-hyperactivity disorder among elementary school children in Johnston County, North Carolina. Am J Public Health. 2002;92:231-234. 5. Faraone SV, Sergeant J, Gillberg C, Biederman J. The Worldwide Prevalence of ADHD: Is it an American Condition? World Psychiatry. 2003;2:104-113. 6. Kessler RC, Adler L, Barkley R, et al. The prevalence and correlates of adult ADHD in the United States: results from the National Comorbidity Survey Replication. Am J Psychiatry. 2006;163:716-723. 7. US Census Bureau Web site. DP-1: Profile of General Demographic Characteristics: 2000. Data set: Census 2000 Summary File 1 (SF 1). Available  
name=DEC_2000_SF1_U_DP1 &ds_name=DEC_2000_SF1_U&geo_ id=01000US. Accessed September 18, 2005. 8. Faraone SV, Spencer TJ, Montano B, Biederman J. Attention-deficit/hyperactivity disorder in adults. A survey of current practice in psychiatry and primary care. Arch Intern Med. 2004; 164:1221 -1226. 9. Faraone SV, Biederman J, Spencer T, et al. Attention-deficit/hyperactivity in adults: an overview. Biol Psychiatry. 2000;48:9-20. 10. Hale TS, Hariri AR, McCracken JT. Attention-deficit/hyperactivity disorder: perspectives from neuroimaging. Ment Retard Dev Disabil Des Rev. 2000;6:214-219. 11. Kaplan RF, Stevens M. A review of adult ADHD: a neuropsychological and neuroimaging perspective. CNS Spectr. 2002;7:355-353. 12. Biederman J, Mick E, Faraone SV. Age dependent decline of ADHD symptoms revisited: impact of remission definition and symptom type. Am J Psychiatry. 2000;157:816-818. 13. Millstein RB, Wilens TE, Biederman J, Spencer TJ. Presenting ADHD symptoms and subtypes in clinically referred adults with ADHD. JAtten Disord. 1997;2:159-166. 14. Weiss G, Hechtman L, Perlman T, Hopkins J, Wener A. Hyperactives as young adults: a controlled, prospective ten-year follow-up of 75 children. Arch Gen Psychiatry. 1979;36:675-681. 15. Mannuzza S, Klein RG, Bessler A, Malloy P, LaPadula M. Adult outcome of hyperactive boys: educational achievement, occupational rank, and psychiatric status. Arch Gen Psychiatry. 1993;50:565-576. 16. Biederman J, Faraone SV, Spencer TJ, et al. Functional impairments in adults with self-reports of diagnosed ADHD: a controlled study of 1001 adults in the community. J Clin Psychiatry. 2006;67:524-540. 17. Barkley RA, Guevremont DC, Anastopoulos AD, DuPaul GJ, Shelton TL. Driving-related risks and outcomes of attention deficit hyperactivity disorder in adolescents and young adults: a 3to 5-year follow-up survey. Pediatrics. 1993;92:212-218. 18. Spencer T, Wilens T, Biederman J, Faraone SV, Ablon S, Lapey K. A doubleblind, crossover comparison of methylphenidate and placebo in adults with childhood-onset attention-deficit hyperactivity disorder. Arch Gen Psychiatry. 1995;52:434-443. 19. Spencer T, Biederman J, Wilens T, et al. Efficacy of a mixed amphetamine salts compound in adults with attention-deficit/hyperactivity disorder. Arch Gen Psychiatry. 2001;58:775-782. 20. Swanson J. Compliance with stimulants for attention-deficit/hyperactivity disorder. Issues and approaches for improvement. CNS Drugs. 2003;17:117-131. 21. Jaffe SL. Failed attempts at intranasal abuse of Concerta {letter], J Am Acad Child Adolesc Psychiatry. 2000;41:5. Comment in: J Am Acad Child Adolesc Psychiatry. 2000:41:756. 22. Castaneda R, Levy R, Hardy M, Trujillo M. Long-acting stimulant for the treatment of attention-deficit disorder in cocaine-dependent adults. Psychiatr Serv. 2000;51:169-171. 23. Tulloch SJ, Zhang Y, McLean A, Wolf KN. SLI381 (Adderall XR), a two-component, extended-release formulation of mixed amphetamine salts: bioavailability of three test formulations and comparison of fasted, fed, and sprinkled administration. Pharmacotherapy. 2002;22:1405-1415. 24. McCracken JT, Biederman J, Greenhill LL, et al. Analog classroom assessment of a once-daily mixed amphetamine formulation, SLI381 (Adderall XR), in children with ADHD. J Am Acad Child Adolesc Psychiatry. 2003;42:673-683. 25. Biederman J, Lopez FA, BoelIner SW, Chandler MC. A randomized, double-blind, placebo-controlled, parallel-group study of SLI381 (Adderall XRJ in children with attention-deficit/hyperactivity disorder. Pediatrics. 2002;110(2 pt 1):258-266. 26. Clausen SB, Read SC, Tulloch SJ. Singleand multiple-dose pharmacokinetics of an oral mixed amphetamine salts extended-release formulation in adults. CNS Spectr. 2005:10(12 suppl 20):6-15. 27. Coding Symbols for Thesaurus of Adverse Reaction Terms. 5th ed. Rockville, MD; Department of Health and Human Services, Center for Drug Evaluation and Research, Office of Epidemiology Biostatistics; 1995. 28. SAS Institute. SAS/STAT Software: Changes and Enhancements Through Release 6.12. Cary, NC: SAS Institute; 1997. 29. Chobanian AV, Bakris GL, Black HR, et al. Seventh report of the Joint National Committee on Prevention, Detection, Evaluation, and Treatment of High Blood Pressure. Hypertension. 2003;42:1206-1252. Epub 2003 Dec 1. 30. Committee for Proprietary Medicinal Products. The assessment of the potential for QT interval prolongation by non-cardiovascular medicinal products. London, UK: The European Agency for the Evaluation of Medicinal Products, Human Medicines Evaluation Unit; 1997 Dec 17. Report No.: CPMP/986/96.

DownLoadSfd’S^SpeK5tM'44Q^ bridge.org/core . Centre Universitaire , on 23 Mar 2017$3$18:48 .subject to the Cambridge Core terms of use, available at August 2006 https/www.cambridge.org/core/terms . https://doi.org/10.1017/S1092852900013687

Original Research

31 Wilens TE, Gignac M, Swezey A, et al. Characteristics of adolescents and young adults with ADHD who divert or misuse their prescribed medications J Am Acad ChildAdolesc Psychiatry. 2006;45:408-414 32. Solanto MV. Neuropsychopharmacological mechanisms of stimulant drug action in attention-deficit hyperactivity disorder: a review and integration. Behav Brain Res. 1998:94:127-152. 33 Borcherding BG. Keysor CS. Cooper TB. Rapoport JL. Differential effects of methylphenidate and dextroamphetamine on the motor activity level of hyperactive children. Neuropsychopharmacology. 1989:2:255-263. 34. Fischer JF. Cho AK. Chemical release of dopamine from striatal homogenates: evidence for an exchange diffusion model. J Pharmacol Exp Then 1979; 192:642-653. 35. Faraone SV, Spencer T, Aleardi M, Pagano C, Biederman J. Meta-analysis of the efficacy of methylphenidate for treating adult attention deficit hyperactivity disorder. J Clin Psychopharmacol. 2004;54:24-29.  
36. Wilens TE, Haight 8R. Horrigan JP, et al. Bupropion XL in adults with attention-deficit/hyperactivity disorder: a randomized, placebo-controlled study. Biol Psychiatry. 2005:57:793-801. 37. Michelson D, Adler L, Spencer T, et al. Atomoxetine in adults with ADHD: two randomized placebo-controlled studies. Biol Psychiatry. 2003:53:112-120. 38. Spencer T, Muniz R, Kim S, et al. Efficacy of dexmethylphenidate extended-release capsules in adults with attention-deficit/hyperactivity disorder. Poster presented at: annual meeting of the American Psychiatric Association; May 1-6,2004; New York, NY. 39. Wilens TE, Spencer TJ, Biederman J, et al. A controlled clinical trial of bupropion for attention deficit hyperactivity disorder in adults. Am J Psychiatry. 2001 ;158:282-288. 40. Adderall XR (package insert). Wayne, Penn: Shire US, Inc.; 2004. 41. Gutgesell H, Atkins D, Barst R, et al. AHA Scientific Statement. Cardiovascular monitoring of children and adolescents receiving psychotropic drugs. J Am Acad Child Adolesc Psychiatry. 1999:38:1047-1050.

Disclosures: Dr. Weisler has received research support from, has been a speaker for, and/or has been a consultant for Abbott, the Agency for Toxic Substances and Disease Registry/Centers for Disease Control and Prevention, AstraZeneca, Biovail, BristolMyers Squibb, Cephalon, Corcept, Eisai, Eli Lilly, Forest, GlaxoSmithKline, Janssen, Johnson and Johnson, Lundbeck, MediciNova, Merck, the National Institute for Mental Health (NIMH), New River, Novartis, Organon, Pfizer, Saegis, Sanofi-Synthelabo, Schwabe, Shire, Solvay, Synaptic, TAP Pharmaceutical Products, UCB Pharma, Vela, and Wyeth; and has held stock in BristolMyers Squibb, Merck, and Pfizer. Dr. Biederman receives research support from Abbott, Bristol-Myers Squibb, Cephalon, Eli Lilly, Janssen, the Lilly Foundation, McNeil, the National Institute of Child Health and Human Development (NICHD), the National Institute on Drug Abuse (NIDA), NeuroSearch, New River, the NIMH, Pfizer, the Prechter Foundation, Shire, and the Stanley Medical Research Institute; and is on the advisory boards of Cephalon, Eli Lilly, Janssen, McNeil, Novartis, and Shire. Dr. Spencer receives research support from Eli Lilly, GlaxoSmithKline, McNeil, the NIMH, Novartis, Pfizer, and Shire; and is on the speakers' bureaus of Eli Lilly, GlaxoSmithKline, McNeil, Novartis, Shire, and Wyeth. Dr. Wilens has received grants, has been on the speaker's bureaus of, and has been a consultant for Abbott, Alza, Celltech, Eli Lilly, OrthoMcNeil, GlaxoSmithKline, Janssen, NeuroSearch, the NICHD, the NIDA, the NIMH, Novartis, Pfizer, Saegis, Sanofi-Synthelabo, and Shire. Dr. Faraone receives research support from Eli Lilly, McNeil Consumer, and Shire; is on the speaker's bureaus of Cephalon, McNeil Consumer, and Shire; and is on the advisory boards of Eli Lilly, McNeil Consumer, Novartis, and Shire. Dr. Chrisman receives research support from McNeil, the NIMH, Noven, Shire, Somerset, and Wyeth; is on the speaker's bureaus of McNeil, Novartis, and Shire; and on the advisory board of Shire. Ms. Read and Dr. Tulloch do not have an affiliation with or financial interest in any organization that might pose a conflict of interest. Presented in part at the 1 56th Annual Meeting of the American Psychiatric Association, May 20, 2003 in San Francisco, California, and at the 157th Annual Meeting of the American Psychiatric Association, May 4, 2004 in New York City. Acknowledgements: The authors thank Dana Randall and Craig Ornstein for assistance with manuscript preparation and the SLI381.303 Study Group: Charles Bailey, MD, Orlando, FL; Michael Banov, MD, Marietta, GA; Louise Beckett, MD, Oklahoma City, OK; Samuel Boellner, MD, Little Rock, AK; Allan Chrisman, MD Durham, NC; Debra Kelsh, MD, Overland Park, KS; Alan Levine, MD, Denver, CO; William J. Privitera, MD, Austin, TX; Murray Rosenthal, MD, San Diego, CA; Keith Saylor, MD, Bethesda, MD; Andrew Cutler, MD, Winter Park, FL; Jonathan Dowben, MD, Birmingham, AL; Kathleen Toups, MD Walnut Creek, CA; Richard Weisler, MD, Raleigh, NC; Andrew Feinberg, MD, Lutherville, MD; Howard Hassman, DO, Clementon, NJ; Janice Miller, MD West Palm Beach, FL; Robert Riesenberg, MD. Funding/Support: This study was supported in part by Shire.

Download^ FTPS' S l 6W&fY w T v T al 8 bricl9e ' or ^ core . Centre Universitaire .on 25 Mar 2017 a> «H8:48 . subject to the Cambridge Core terms of use, available at httpsywww.cambridge.org/core/terms . https//doi.org/10.1017/S1092852900015687  
August 2006

I never thought I could be myself again Now I can #1 > Now the most prescribed atypical* Proven efficacy To help patients achieve continued success 114 Trusted tolerability To help patients stay on treatment 1 ' 5 SEROQUEL is indicated for the treatment of acute manic episodes associated with bipolar I disorder, as either monotherapy or adjunct therapy with lithium or divalproex, and the treatment of schizophrenia. Patients should be periodically reassessed to determine the need for continued treatment. Elderly patients with dementia-related psychosis treated with atypical antipsychotic drugs are at an increased risk (1.6 to 1.7 times) of death compared to placebo (4.5% vs 2.6%, respectively). SEROQUEL is not approved for the treatment of patients with dementia-related psychosis. Prescribing should be consistent with the need to minimize the risk of tardive dyskinesia. A rare condition referred to as neuroleptic malignant syndrome has been reported with this class of medications, including SEROQUEL. Hyperglycemia, in some cases extreme and associated with ketoacidosis, hyperosmolar coma, or death, has been reported in patients treated with atypical antipsychotics, including SEROQUEL. Patients starting treatment with atypical antipsychotics who have or are at risk for diabetes should undergo fasting blood glucose testing at the beginning of and during treatment. Patients who develop symptoms of hyperglycemia should also undergo fasting blood glucose testing. Precautions include the risk of seizures, orthostatic hypotension, and cataract development. The most commonly observed adverse events associated with the use of SEROQUEL in clinical trials were somnolence, dry mouth, dizziness, constipation, asthenia, abdominal pain, postural hypotension, pharyngitis, SGPT increase, dyspepsia, and weight gain. ‘All atypical prescriptions: Total prescriptions. Jan. 05-Feb. 06. New prescriptions. Sept. 04-Feb. 06. IMS Health. National Prescription Audit. * Significant improvement in all 11 YMRS items was measured at Day 21 and continued through Day 84 in monotherapy mania trials. Please see Brief Summary of Prescribing Information on adjacent page. Seroquel quetiapine fumarate 25 mg, 50 mg, 100 mg, 200 mg, 300 mg i 400 mg tablets Redefine Success

© 2006 AstraZeneca Pharmaceuticals LP. All rights reserved. SEROQUEL is a registered trademark of the AstraZeneca group of companies. 239378 4/06 WWW.SEROQUEL.com

References: 1. Vieta E, Mullen J, Brecher M, et al. Quetiapine monotherapy for mania associated with bipolar disorder: combined analysis of two international, double-blind, randomised, placebo-controlled studies. Curr Med Res Opm. 2005:21:923-934. 2. Sachs G, Chengappa KNR, Suppes T, et al. Quetiapine with lithium or divalproex for the treatment of bipolar mania: a randomized, double-blind, placebo-controlled study Bipolar Disord 2004,6 213-223. 3. Small JG. Kolar MC. Kellams JJ Quetiapine in schizophrenia: onset ofaction within the first week of treatment. Curr Med Res Opin. 2004:20:1017-1023. 4. Kasper S. Brecher M. Frtton L. et al. Maintenance of long-term efficacy and safety of quetiapine in the open-label treatment of

Downloa(ie3 P ?rom' . Centre Universitaire , on 23 Mar 2017 at 19:18:48 , subject to the Cambridge Core terms of use, available at

https:/www.cambridge.org/core/terms . https://doi.org/10.1017/S1092852900013687

BRIEF SUMMARY of Prescribing Information—Before prescribing, please consult complete conribute to an elevation in core body temperature, e.g., exercising strenuously, exposure Treatment-Emergent to extreme heat, Adverse receivExperience Incidence In 3to 12-Week Placebo-Controlled Clinic

Prescribing information.  
ing concomitant medication with anticholinergic activity, or being subject to dehydration. Dysphagia: Esophagel Treatment of Schizophrenia end Bipolar Mania (monotherapy): Body as a Whole: Headache, Pain,

dysmotility and aspiration have been associated with antipsychotic drug use. Aspiration pneumonia is a ommon Abdominal Pain, Back Pain, Fever; Cardiovascular.' Tachycardia, Postural Hypotension; Digestive: Increased Mortality In Elderly Patients wftfi Dementia-Related Psychosis cause of morbidity and mortality in elderly patients, in particular those with advanced Alzheimer’s dementia. Constipation, Vomiting, Dyspepsia, Gastroenteritis, Gamma Glutamyl, Transpeptidase Increased; Elderty patients with dementia-related psychosis treated with atypical antipsychotic drugs are at an SEROQUEL and other antipsychotic drugs should be used cautiously in patients at risk tor aspiration pneumonia. Nutritional: Weight Gain, SGPT Increased, SGOT Increased; Nervous: Agitation, Somnolence, Diis Increased risk of death compared to placebo. Analyses of seventeen placebo-controlled trials (modal Suicide: The possibility of a suicide attempt is inherent in bipolar disorder and schizophrenia; close supervision of Respiratory: Pharyngitis, Rhinitis; Skin and Appendages: Rash; Specie I Senses: Amblyopia. 'Eve duration ol 10 weeks) In these patients revealed a risk of death in the drug-treated patients of between high risk patients should accompany drug therapy. Prescriptions for SEROQUEL should be written for the smallest SEROQUEL incidence was equal to or less than placebo are not listed, but included the follon 1.6 to 1.7 times that seen In placebo-treated patients. Over the course of a typical 10 week controlled quantity of tablets consistent with good patient management in order to reduce the risk of overdose. Use In Patients trial, the rale ol death In dreg-treated patients was about 4.5%, compared to a rate of about 2.6% in the akathisia, chest pain, cough increased, depression, diarrhea, extrapyramidal syndrome, hostil, with Concomitant Illness: Clinical experience with SEROQUEL in patients with certain concomitant systemic illnessplacebo group. Although the causes of death were varied, most of the deaths appeared to be either carhypertonia, hypotension, increased appetite, infection, insomnia, leukopenia, malaise, naue es is limited. SEROQUEL has not been evaluated or used to any appreciable extent in patients with a recent history diovascular (eg, heart failure, sudden death) or Infectious (eg, pneumonia) In nature. SEROQUEL (quetithesia, peripheral edema, sweating, tremor, and weight loss. In these studies, the most commonly of myocardial infarction or unstable heart disease. Patients with these diagnoses were excluded from premarketing apine) is not approved for the treatment of patients with Dementia-Related Psychosis. events associated with the use of SEROQUEL (incidence of 5% or greater) and observed at a rat clinical studies. Because of the risk of orthostatic hypotension with SEROQUEL, caution should be observed in carleast twice that of placebo were somnolence (18%), dizziness (11%), dry mouth (9%), constipation diac patients (see Orthostatic Hypotension). Information for Patients: Physicians are advised to discuss the followincreased (5%), weight gain (5%), and dyspepsia (5%), Table 2, from the full Prescribing Information, INDICATIONS AND USAGE: Bipolar Mania SEROQUEL is indicated for the treatment of ing acute issues manic with episodes atient assofor whom they prescribe SEROQUEL. Orthostatic Hypotension: Patients should be advised the incidence, rounded to the nearest percent of treatment-emergent adverse events that occurred ciated with bipolar I disorder, as either monotherapy or adjunct therapy to lithium or divalproex. of the risk of The orthostatic efficacy of hypotension, especially (luring the 3-5 day period of initial dos titration, and also at times SEROQUEL in acute bipolar mania was established in two 12-week monotherapy Inals of and re-initiating one 3-week tretment adjunct or therincreases m dose. Interference with Cognitive and Motor Performanc: (up to 3-weeks) Since of acute somnomania in 5% or more of patients treated with SEROQUEL (doses ranging apy trial of bipolar I patients initially hospitalized for up to 7 days for acute mama. Effectiveness lenc wa a has commonly not been reported sysadverse event associated with SEROQUEL treatment, mg/day) patients used hould as adjunct be advised therapy of to lithium and divalproex where the incidence in patents treated tematically evaluated in clinical trials for more than 12 weeks in monotherapy and 3 weeks the risk in adjunct of somnolnce, therapy. especially during the 3-5 day period of initial dose titration. Patients was greater should than be the cautioned incidence in placebo-treated patients. Tteatmeni-Emerjent Advene Experience Therefore, the physician who elects to use SEROQUEL for extended periods should periodically abut performing re-evaluate any activity the longrequiring mental alertness, such as operating a motor vehicl 3-Week (including Placebo-Controlled automobiles) Clinical Triale' for the Treatment of Bipolar Mania (Adjunct Therapy): term risks and benefits of the drug for the individual patient Schizophrenia SEROQUEL or is operating indicated hazardous for the treatmachinery, until they are reasonably certain that SEROQUEL Whole: therapy Headache, does not affect Asthenia, them Abdominal Pain, Back Pain; Cardiovascular: Postural Hypotension; men! of schizophrenia. The efficacy of SEROQUEL in schizophrenia was established in adversely, short-term Pregnancy; (6-week) conPatients should be advised to notify their physician it they become Mouth, pregnant Constipation; or intend Metabolic to and flutrlthiwl: Weight Gain; Nervous: Somnolence, Dizziness, trolled trials of schizophrenic inpatients. The effect.veness of SEROQUEL in long-term become use, that pregnant is, for more during than therapy. 6 weeks, Nursing: Patients should be advised not to breast feed Respiratory: if they are Pharyngitis. taking 'Events for which the SEROQUEL UM «,,«« incidence 1M0 was equal to or less than has not been systematically evaluated in controlled trials. Therefore, the physician who elects to use SEROQUEL for SEROQUEL. Concomitant Medication: As with other medications, patients should be advised to notify their physed, but included the following: akathisia, diarrhea, insomnia, and nausea. extended periods should periodically re-evaluate the long-term usefulness of the drug for the individual patient. cians if they are taking, or plan to take, any prescription or over-the-counter drugs. Alcohol: Patients should be observed adverse events associated with the use of SEROQUEL (Incidence CONTRAINDICATIONS: SEROQUEL is contraindicated in individuals with a known hypersensitivity to this medication advisedtoayoidwnsumwalcoholicbeverag^wtilelal<lngSEROOUELH<atEiposinsndDfifMlrata:?aMts SEROQUEL at least twee that ol ptaito win somnolence I34%|, dry mouth (19%). asteiia or any of its ingredients. SIS “J" ? nt, deh y«raMr Uboralory Tests: No stealh „ (I0%|f lkta(nal pi „ m posW ptar ^ llhi ' w glip [S ' %1 WARNINGS: Increased Mortality in Elderly Patients with Dementia-Related Psychosis: Elderly patients with dementia-related psychosis treated with atypical antipsychotic drugs are at an increased IJ5 risk of death compared ‘SiSEPrKXSriSWn? <“fin*»ractloiisonthebasisolger<ler 1 aoe.andracedldni>trevBalaayclliilcallymeanlnofulllltfererces'niheadverae &ItaM ta £3 tT, //ill evHlt on te basis ol test dmopraptic factors. Don Dtptmbnq of Advin Ends In Stiort-Tenn. to placebo. SEROQUEL (quetiapine) Is not approved lor the treatment ol patients with dementia-related psychosis (see Boxed Warning). Neuroleptic Malignant Syndrome (NMS). A potentially fatal ZZ symptom >nd complex S Sas"/' someaKol n't *SSstrt SS3 nsrtoteOose-ralatad Adtim Ends: Stnntantously elicited adarsi awt daa tarn a sidy d times referred to as Neuroleptic Malignant Syndrome (NMS) has been reported in association with administration of antipsychotic drugs, including SEROQUEL. Rare cases of NMS have been reported with may SEROQUEL. enhance the Clinical effects maniof certain antihypertensive agents. SEROQUEL may antagonize the effects of levodopa and b0 wa [ e Twi 2 tedness of adverse events. Logistic regression analyses festations of NMS are hyperpyrexia, muscle rigidity, altered mental status, and evidence dopamine of autonomic agonists. instability The Effect ol Other Drags on Quetiapine: Phenytoin: Coadministration of quetiapine (250 mg fer 9,8 adverse e'/ents: dyspepsia, abdominal pain, and weight ga-i. Extrapyramidal (irregular pulse or blood pressure, tachycardia, diaphoresis, and cardiac dysrhythmia). tid) Additional and phenytoin signs (100 may mg indude tid) increased the mean oral clearance of quetiapine by 5-fold. Increased noses of ^f^M^fa from one 6-week clinical tr^ of schizophrenia companng five fixed elevated creatine phosphokinase, myoglobinuria (rhabdomyolysis) and acute renal failure. SEROQUEL The diagnostic may be rquired evaluation to maintain control of symptoms of schizophrenia in patients receiving quetiapine and 7® nwy) provided evidence for the lack of treatment-emergent extrapyramidal of patients with this syndrome is complicated. In arriving at a diagnosis, it is important phenytoin, to exclude or cases other where hepatic the nzyme inducers (e.g., carbamazepine, barbiturates, rifampin, glucocorticoids). Caution elatedness for EPS associated with SEROQUEL treatment. Three clinical presentation includes both serious medical illness (e.g.,pneumonia, systemic should infection, be etc.) taken and if phenytoin untreated is withdrawn and replaced with a non-inducer (e.g„ valproate). Divalproex: Angus total score (mean change from baseline) which evaluates parkinsonism or inadequately treated extrapyramidal signs and symptoms (EPS). Other important considerations in the differential Coaministraton of quetiapine (150 mg bid) and divalproex (500 mg bid) increased the mean maximum plasma conneous complaints of EPS (akathisia, akinesia, cogwheel rigidity, diagnosis include central anticholinergic tax city, heat stroke, drug fever and primary central nervous system (CNS) trtion of quetiapine at steady-state by 17% without affecting the extent of absorption or mean oral clearance, neck rigidity, and tremor), and (3) use of anticholinergic medications pathology. The management of NMS should include: 1) immediate discontinuation of antipsychotic drugs and other Thioridazine: Thioridzine (200 mg bid) increased the oral clearance of quetiapine (300 mg bid) by 65%. Cimetidine: Laboratory Studies: Vital Sign Changes: SEROQUEL is associated drugs not essential to concurrent therapy; 2) intensive symptomatic treatment and medical monitoring; and 3) treatAdministratin of multiple dily doses of cimetidine (400 mg tid for 4 days) resulted in a 20% decrease in the mean Weight Gain: In schizophrenia trials the proportions of patients meeting ment of any concomitant serious medical problems for which specific treatments are available. There is no general oral clearance of quetiapine (150 mg tid). Dosage adjustment tor quetiapine is not required when it is given with ci mewere compared in a pool of four 3to 6-week placeborcontrolled agreement about specific pharmacological treatment regimens for NMS. If a patient requires antipsychotic drug tidine. P45D 3A Inhibitors: Coadministration of ketoconazole 1200 mg once daily for 4 days), a potent inhibitor of greater incidence of weight gam for SEROQUEL (23%) compared to treatment after recovery from NMS, the potential reintroduction of drug therapy should be carefully considered. The cytochrome P450 3A. reduced oral clearance of ua 8 ln n a 335% increase in maximum plasproportions of patients meeting the same weight gain criterion were patient should be carefully monitored since recurrences of NMS have been reported. Tardive Dyskinesia: A synma concentration of quetiapine. Caution is indicated when SEROQUEL is administered with ketoconazole and other adjunct therapy trials the proportion of patients meeting the same drome of potentially irreversible, involuntary, dyskinetic movements may develop in patients treated with antipsyinhibitors of cytochrome P450 3A (e.g, . .itraconazole, fiuconuole. and erythromycin). Fluoxetine, Imipramina, placebo. Laboratory Changes: An assessment of the premarketing experience chotic drugs. Although the prevalence of the syndrome appears to be highest among the elderly, especially elderty Haloperidol, and Risperidone: Coadministration of fluoxetine (60 mg once daily); imipramine (75 mg bid), halopenassoc j a te{5 with asymptomatic increases in SGPT and increases in women, it is impossible to rely upon prevalence estimates to predict, at the inception of antipsychotic treatment,

2 ■ fT3in O r SSm. which patients are likely to develop the syndrome. Whether antipsychotic drug products differ in fl their potential to cause tardive dyskinesia is unknown. The risk of developing tardive dyskinesia and the likelihood that it will become too SS reduce?tw£ irreversible are believed to increase as the duration of treatment and the total cumulative mifSSrenfrM dose of antipsychotic drugs  
CAUTIONS). An assessment of hematological parameters in short-term, placeborcontrolled trials The ly if11portant dterees between SER0QUEL and placetl0 ' ECG Ch,nyBS: Betwesn oroup com ' )arisons ,or P“ l&d placebo<ontrolled tnals revealed no statistically significant SEROQUEUplacebo differences m the

administered to the patient increase. However, the syndrome can develop, although much less commonly, after relby 10 to 12% when divalproex (500 mg bid) was administered with quetiapine (150 mg bid). The mean oral clearatively brief treatment periods at low doses. There is no known treatment for established ance cases of total of tardive valproic dyslcnesia. acid (administered as divalproex 500 mg bid) was increased by 11 % in the presence of quetiproportions of patients meeting the critena for tachycard ai werei although the syndrome may remit, partially or completely, if antipsychotic treatment is withdrawn. Antipsychotic apine (150 mg bid). The changes were not significant. Lithium: Concomitant administration of quetiapine (250 mg ?, l 2 l S.^ a , s 2 Of ,r ® a,ment of schizophrenia revealing a 1% (4/399) incidence treatment, itself, however, may suppress (or partially suppress) the signs and symptoms of the syndrome and theretid) wi lithium had no effect on any of the steady-state pharmacokinetic parameters of lithium. Antipyrine: (1/156) incidenceifor placebo. In acute (monotherapy) bipolar mama trials by may possibly mask the undertying process. The effect that symptomatic suppression has upon the long-term Administration of multiple daily doses up to 750 mg/day (on a id schedule) of quetiapine to subjects with sheeted ,ena or tachycardia was 0.5% (1/192) for SEROQUEL comjiared to 0% course of the syndrome is unknown. Given these considerations, SEROQUEL should be presented in a manner that psychotic disorders had no clinically relevant effect on the clearance of antipyrine or urinary recovery of antipyrine ® m3ma (adjunct) trials the proportions of patients meeting the same is most likely to minimize the occurrence of tardive dyskinesia. Chronic antipsychotic treatment should generally be metbolites. These results indi h tiapine does not significant^ induce hepatic enzymes responsible for pared to 0% ((VI71) incidence for placebo. SEROQUEL use was associated reserved tor patients who appear to suffer from a chronic illness that (1) is known to respond to antipsychotic drugs, cytochrome P450 mediated metabolism of antipyrine. Carcinogenesis, Mutagarvesis. Impairment of Fertility: assessed by ECG, of 7 beats per minute compared to a mean increase of and (2) for whom alternative, equally effective, but potentially less harmful treatments are not available or appropriCarcinogenesis: Carcinogenicity studies were conducted in C57BL mic s ts. Quetiapine was adminisThis slight tendency to tachycardia may be related to SEROQUEL’s ate. In patients who do require chronic treatment, the smallest dose and the shortest duration of treatment productered in the diet to mice at doses of 20,75,250, and 750 mg/kg and to rats by gavage at doses of 25,75, and CAUTIONS). Other Adverse Events Observed During the Pra-Martteting Evaluation ing a satisfactory clinical response should be sought. The need for continued treatment should be reassessed peri250 mg/kg for two years. These drees are equivalent to 0.1,0.5,1.5, and 4.5 times the maximum human dose of COSTART terms that reflect treatment-emergent adverse events as defined odically. If signs and symptoms of tardive dyskinesia appear in a patient on SEROQUEL, drug discontinuation should 1800 mg/day) on a mg/m’ basis (mice) or 0.3,0.9, and 3.0 times the maximum human dose on a mg/m ? basis REACTIONS section reported by patients treated with SEROQUEL at multiple be considered. However, some patients may require treatment with SEROQUEL despite the presence of the syndrome. (rats). There were statistically significant increases in thyroid gland follicular adenomas in male mice at doses of 250 a trial within the premarketing database of approximately 2200 Hyperglycemia and Diabetes Me 11 Itus: Hyperglycemia, in some cases extreme and associated with ketoacidosis or and 750 mg/kg or 1.5 and 4.5 tim the maximum human dose on a mg/m 2 * * basis and in male rats at a dose of are included except those already listed in Table 1 or elsewhere in labeling, hyperosmolar coma or death, has been reported in patients treated with atypical antipsychotics, including SEROQUEL. or 3.0times the irodmum human dose on a mg/m''bass Mammaiygland adenocarcinomas were staremote, and those event terms which were sc general as to be uninformative, Assessment of the relationship between atypical antipsychotic use and glucose abnormalities is qomplicated by the stically significantly increased in female rats at all drees tested (25,75, and 250 mg/kg or 0.3,0.9, and 3.0 times although the events reported occurred during treatment wnh SEROQUEL possibility of an increased background risk of diabetes meliitus in patients with schizophrenia and the increasing inci-

dence of diabetes meliitus in the general population. Grven these confounders, the relationship between atypical Evenls ar9 fur1her cateoorizd t t o easing frequency according

antipsychotic use and hyperglycemia-related adverse events is not completely understood. £2 de, ' nitons: However, Mumt epidemiologiadverse events are tae occurring in at least 1/100 patients (only three not already listed in the

cal studies suggest an increased risk of treatment-emergent hyperglycemia-related adverse Ss nSaiSrnre events in patients oSd ir resjlts trQm P tobMmtlolled Ws appear in this listing); infreque a vents are tnose occurnng in

treated with the atypical antipsychotics Precise risk estimates for hyperglycemia-related adverse events in patients however, the results of these studies were not definitive. The relevance of the increases in thyroid follicular cell ade^ treated with atypical antipsychotics are not available. Patients with an established diagnosis of diabetes meliitus who nomas tc human risk, through whatever mechanism, is unknown. Antipsychotic drugs have been shown to chronibyperton,a ' abno ™ d ! ea ^ s l d X sk abnormal tardive dyskinesia, vertigo, are started on atypical antipsychotics should be monitored regularly for worsening of glucose control. Patients with calfy elevate prolactin levels in rodents. Serum measurement in a 1-yr toxicity study showed that quetiapine Dn fary rnowments, confusion, amnesia, psychosis, ha) uonations, hyperJonesia, risk factors for diabetes meliitus (eg, obesity, family history of diabetes) who are starting treatment with atypical increased median serum prolactin levels a maximum of 32and 13-fold in male and female rats, respectively, ^coordination, paranoid reaction, abnormal gait, myoclonus, delusions, antipsychotics should undergo fasting blood glucose testing at the beginning of treatment and periodically during increases in mammary neoplasms have been found in rodents after chronic administration of other antipsychotic stuPM bruxism, catatonic reaction, hemiplegia; Rm: aphasia, bucsogiossal treatment. Any patient treated with atypical antipsychotics should be monitored for symptoms of hyperglycemia drugs and are considered to be prolactin-mediated. The relevance of this increased incidence of prolactin-mediated 'uni, emotional lability, euphoria, libido decreased', neuralgia, stuttering, including polydipsia, polyuria, polyphagia, and weakness. Patients who develop symptoms of hyperglycemia during mammary gland tumors in rats to human risk is unknown (see Hyperprolactinemia in PRECAUTIONS General), flu syndrome; Infrequent: neck pain, pelvic pain*, suicide attempt, malaise, treatment with atypical antipsychotics should undergo fasting blood glucose testing. In some cases, hyperglycemia Mutagenreis: The mutagenic potential of quetiapine was tested in six i bacterial gene mutation assays and in face edema, moniliasis; flare: abdomen enlarged. Ds has resolved when the atypical antipsychotic was discontinued; however, some patients required continuation of antian in vitro mammalian gene mutation assay in Chinese Hamster Ovary cells. However, sufficiently high concentrevation, increased appetite, gamma glutamyl transpeptidase increased, diabetic treatment despite discontinuation of the suspect drug. Hons of quetiapine may not have been used for all tester strains. Quetiapine did produce a reproducible increase in gastritis, hemorrhoids, sto thirst, tooth caries, fecal incontinence, PRECAUTIONS: General: Orthostatic Hypotension: SEROQUEL may induce orthostatic hypotension associated with mutations in one Salmonella tvplmirium tester strain in the presence of metabolic activation. No evidence ot clasmouth ulceration, rectal hemorrhage, tongue edema; Ban: glossitis, dizziness, tachycardia and, in some patients, syncope, especially during the initial dose-titration period, probably togenic potential was obtained in an mwfro chromosomal aberration assay in cultured human lymphocytes or in the pancreatitis. Cardtovasctilar Systwi: Frequent palpitation; infrequent: reflecting its a,-adrenergic antagonist properties. Syncope was reported in 1% (23/2567) of the patients treated with «? wVo micronucleus assay in rats. Impairment of Fertility: Quetiapine decreased mating and fertility in male migraine, bradycardia c h g v ity, SEROQUEL, compared with 0% (0/607) on placebo and about 0.4% (2/527) on active control drugs. SEROQUEL Sprague-Oawley rats at oral drees of 50 and 150 mg/kg or 0.6and 1.8 times the maximum human dose on a mg/m 2 jar accident, deep thrombophlebitis, T wave inversion; Re/s: angina should be used with particular caution in patients with known cardiovascular disease (history of myocardial infarcbreis. Drug-related effects included increases in interval to matei and in the number ot matings required for successcongestive heart failure, ST elevated, thrombophlebitis, T wave tion or ischemic heart disease, heart failure or conduction abnormalities), cerebrovascular disease or conditions ful impregnation. These effects continued to be observed at 150 mg/kg even after a two-week penod without treatRespiratory System: Frequent pharyngitis, rhinitis, cough Increased, which would predispose patients to hypotension (dehydration, hypovolemia and treatment with antihypertensive medications). The risk of orthostatic hypotension ana syncope may be minimized by limiting the initial dose to 25 mg bid. If hypotension occurs during titration to the target dose, a return to the previous dose in the titration l Aelflhttoss,lkalmphosphataseirK(as6d 1 hyp8rllpeira,alcoholl»/lfiniM der/drali«i 1 hype. g Dcemia,creZme schedule is appropriate. Cataracts: The development of cataracts was observed in association with quetiapine dras h! Stta rt n°'Z STorn Z SncZt in fc gout hard adama, hypokalam rater intMdaton S»ln nd Appeidages tzaalmafrt In chronic in rtudiea (see Animal Toxicology), Lens changes have alio been observed In pallente irregular estrus cycles was ohsarwd at dases di fo and 50 rngltg, or 0,1 and 0.0 times the maximum human dose during long-term SEROQUEL treatment, but a causal relationship to SEROQUEL use has not been established. on a im W lass Die nMttecl dose in female rats was 1 mgkg, or 0,01 lines the maximum M dose on a S St. 25 * 5 .. 2 dysmerorrtiea Nevertheless, the possibility of lenticular changes cannot be excluded at this time. Therefore, examination of mg/m 2 oasis. Pregnancy: Pregnancy Category C: The teratogenic polental of quetiapine was studied in Wistar rats '^ Initl . 5 * * ’ inccn 7inenceHTietror+iagia impotence, dysuria, vagina moniliasis, the lens by methods adequate to detect cataract formation, such as silt lamp exam or other appropriately senand Dutch Belted rabbits dosed during the period of organogenes s No evidence of a teratogenic effect was detected „ - unr 'a r Y frequency, amenorrhea, female lactation, leukorrhea, sitive methods, Is recommended at initiation of treatment or shortly thereafter, and at 6 month Intervals during in rats at doses of 25 to 200 m^kg or 0.3 to 2.4 tirrtes the maximum human dree on a mg/m 2 basis or in rabbits at wreewnastia*, nocturia, polyuria, acute kidney failure. Special Senses: chronic treatment. Seizures: During clinical trials, seizures occurred In 0.6% (18/2792) of patients treated with 25 to 100 mgkg or 0.6 to 2.4 times the maximum human dose on a mg/m 2 basis. There was, however, evidence of won, dry eyes, tinnitus, taste perversion, blepharitis, eye pain, flan: SEROQUEL compared to 0.2% (1/607) o r placebo and 0.7% (4/527) on active control drugs. As with other antipsyembryo/fetal toxicity. Delays in skeletal ossification were detected in rat fetuses at doses of 50 and 200 mg/kg (0.6 and coma. Musculoskeletal System: infrequent pathological fracture, chotics SEROQUEL should be used cautiously in patients with a history of seizures or with conditions that potentially 2.4 times the maximum human dree on a mg/m 2 basis) and in rabbits at 50 and 100 mg/kg (1.2 and 2.4 times the cramps, bone pain. Hemic and Lymphatic System: Frequent: leukopenia; lower the seizure threshold, e.g., Alzheimer s dementia. Conditions that lower the seizure threshold may be more maximum human dose ona mg/m 2 basis). Fetol body weight was reduced in rat fetuses at 200 mg/kg and rabbit fetusmosis, eosinophilia, hypochromic anemia; tymphadenopathy, prevalent in a population of 65 years or older. Hypothyroidism: Clinical trials with SEROQUEL demonstrated a dosees at 100 mg/kg (2.4 times the maximum human dose on a mg/m 2 basis for both species). There was an increased Endocrine System: Infrequent hypothyroidism, diabetes meliitus; Ro: related decrease in total and free thyroxine (T4) of approximately 20% at the higher end of the therapeutic dose range incidence of a minor soft tissue anomaly (carjortarsal flexure) in rabbit fetuses at a dose of 100 mg/kg (2.4 times the Marieting Experience: Adverse events reported since market introduction and was maximal in the first two to four weeks of treatment and maintained without adaptation or progression durmaximum hman dose on a mg/m 2 basis). Evidence of maternal toxicity (i.e., decreases in body weight gain and/or QUEL therapy indude: leukopenia'neutropenia. If a patient develops ing more chronic therapy Generally, these changes were of no clinical significance and TSH was unchanged in most death) was observed at the high dose in the rat study and at all doses in the rabbit study. In a peri/postnatal reproof therapy. Possible risk factors for isukopen'a/neutropenia include patients, and levels of TBG were unchanged. In nearly all cases, cessation of SEROQUEL treatment was associated ductive study in rats, no drug-related effects were observed at doses of 1,10, and 20 mg/kg or 0.01,0.12, and induced leukopenia/neutropenia. Other adverse events reported since market with a reversal of the effects on total and free T4, irrespective of the duration of treatment. About 0.4% (12/2791) ol SEROQUEL patients did experience TSH increases in monotherapy studies. Six of the 0.24 patients times the with maximum TSH increashuman dose on a mg/m 2 basis. However, in a preliminary peri/postnatal study, there were related to SEROQUEL therapy, but not necessarily causally related,

es needed replacement thyroid treatment. In the mama adjunct studies, where SEROQUEL ircrease was in added fetal to and lithium pp death, or and decreases in mean litter weight at 150 mg/kg, or 3.0 times the maximum human hyponatremia, rhabdomyolysis, syndrome of inappropriate

dos on a mg/m 2 basis. There are no adequate and well-controlled studies in pregnant women and quetiapine should Johnson Syndrome (SJS) divalproate, 12% (24/196) of SEROQUEL treated patients compared to 7% (15/203) of placebo treated patients had It ™ ““““ “MH®: c««l OIK SEROQUEL is not a oontroH substance. FHyskal levels. Cholesterol and Triglyceride Elevations: In schizophrenia trials, SEROQUEL treated patients had increases h from baseline in cholesterol and triglyceride of 11% and 1 /%, respectively, compared to slight decreases for placeWloratetolarancewbbysicaldappndencsWeliiedlnicaltrlalsdldnorrewalanytmden^foranySrao-saakbo patients. These changes were only weakly related to the increases in weight observed in SEROQUEL treated pediatric patiets have o ben established. Geriatric' Use: Ot the approximate?3400 patients in clinical studies with in6 "a JS ? P ? S J lble J pf ?'2 n T patients. Hyperprolactinemia: Although an elevation of prolactin levels was not demonstrated in clinical trials with SEROQUEL 7% (232) were 65 years of age or over. In general, there was no indication of any different tolerability of ST SEROQUEL, increased prolactin levels were observed In rat studies with this compound, and were associated with SEROQUEL in the elderty comprd to younger adults. Nevertheless, the presence ot factors that might decrease pharpate1ts . 5h0ljltl 0 a hl ^. 0< d apbS ? 1 and patients aflould obsenwd closely lor an increase in mammary gland neoplasia in rats (see Carcinogenesis). Tissue culture experiments indicate that macokinetic clearance, increase the pharmacodynamic response to SEROQUEL, orcause poorer tolerance or orthostaat)use ol SEQUEL, e.g., development of tolerance, approximately one-third of human breast cancers are prolactin dependent in vitro, a factor of potential importance if sis, should lead to consideration ot a lower starting dose, slower titration, and careful monitoring during the initial dosOVERDOSAGE: Human experience: Experience with SEROQUEL the prescription of these drugs is contemplated in a patient with previously detected breast cancer. Although disturing period in the elderly. The mean plasma clearance of SEROQUEL was reduced by 30% to 50% in elderty patients ^e clinical tnal database (6 reports) with estimated doses ranging bances such as galactorrhea, amenorrhea, gynecomastia and impotence have been reported with prolactin-elevatwhen compared to younger patients. ties. In general, reported signs and symptoms were those resulting from an exaggeration of the ing compounds, the clinical significance of elevated serum prolactin levels is unknown for most patients. Neither clinADVERSE REACTIONS: The nformation below is derived from a clinical trial database for SEROQUEL consisting of macological effects, i.e, drowsiness and sedation, tachycardia and ical studies nor epidemiologic studies conducted to date have shown an association between chronic administration over 3000 patients. This database includes 405 patents exposed to SEROQUEL for the treatment of acute bipolar overdose of 9600 mo, was associated with hypokalemia and first degree of this class of drugs and tumorigenesis in humans; the available evidence is considered too limited to be conclusive at this time Transaminase Elevations; Asymptomatic, transient and reversible elevations mania in serum (monoherapy transaminases and adjunct therapy) and approximately 2600 patients and/or normal subjects exposed tc 1 or there have been very rare reports of overdose of SEROQUEL alone (primarily ALT) have been reported. In schizophrenia trials, the proportions of patients more with dose transaminase of SEROQUEL elevations for the treatment of schizophrenia Of these approximately 3000 subjects, approximately Management ot Overdosage: In case ol acute overdosage, establish of > 3 times the upper limits ol the normal reference range in a pool of 3to 6-week placebo-controlled 2700 (2300 in schizophrenia trials were and 405 in acute bipolar mania) were patients who partic-ipated in multiple dose effecoxygenation and ventilation. Gastric lavage (after intubation, if patient approximately 6% for SEROQUEL compared to 1% for placebo. In acute bipolar mania tiveness trials, the trials, proportions and their of experience corresponded to approximately 914.3 patient-years. Refer to the full Prescribing ed charcoal together with a laxative should be considered. The possibility patients with transaminase elevations of > 3 times the upper limits of the normal reference Iriformtion range in for a details pool of of 3adverse to event data collection _Adverse Findings Observed In Short-Term, Controlled tion of the head and neck following overdose may create a risk of aspiration 12-week placebo-controlled trials were approximately 1% for both SEROQUEL and placebo. 1, 8 * * 1 u These T hepatic enzyme *rt(fi Dlscontinuafion of Treatment in Mort-Term, Placebo-Controlled Trials: monitoring should commence immediately and should include continuous electrocardiographic elevations usually occurred within the first 3 weeks of drug treatment and promptly returned to pre-study levels with 8 po a \h 3n a: s du c e l J?,^ ve T e ? en s T r L 5 ,'/ A ,or SEROQUEL vs. 5,t% tor placebo possible arrhythmias. If anliarrhythmic therapy is administered, disopyramide, procainamide ongoing treatment with SEROQUEL. Potential lor Cognitive and Motor Impairment Somnolence was a commonly theoretical hazard ot additive QT-prolonging effects vrtien administered in patients with acute overdosage reported adverse event reported in patients treated with SEROQUEL especially during litl the difference 3-5 day period in the of incidence initial of discontinuation due to adverse events (4% for SEROQUEL vs. 3% for placebo) in SEROQUEL Similarly it is reasonable to exoect that the aloha adrenerak:

dcse-titration. In schizophrenia trials, somnolence was reported in 18% of patients on SEROQUEL compared to 11% of placebo patients In acute bipolar mania trials using SEROQUEL as monotherapy, somnolence was reported in  
addittatoihoseo^^

16% of patients on SEROQUEL compared to 4% of placebo patients. In acute bipolar mania Adverse trials Events using Ocmlng SEROQUEL at an Incidence ol 1% or More Long SEROQUEL Treated Patients in Short-Term, irt^ be considered. Hypotension and circulatory collapse should be treated with appropriate measu PlacrtControllBa Trill: Dre presenter shoulS W irare w ft Wes in tie taoles and tabulations in ft full «“t™ rt cetase should br mind rim emrt* musms such w rim as adjunct therapy, somnolence was reported in 34% of patients on SEROQUEL compared to of placebo patients. venous fluids and/or sympathomimetic agents (epinephrine and dopamine should not be used, Since SEROQUEL has the potential to impair judgment, thinking, or motor skills, patients Prescribing should be Information cautioned cnno about be used to predict the incidence of side effects in the course ot usual medical prac- . . x -r~ - --- - -r - performing activities requiring mental alertness, such as ope r ating a motor vehicle (including tice where automobiles) patient characteristics or operand other factors differ from those that prevailed in the clinical trials. Similarly, the 5°, 11 , wsen hypotension in the setting of quetapme-lnduced cited frequenies cannot be compared with figures obtained from other clinical investigations involving different treat- ®l symptoms^antichohnerg ic medication should be administered. ating hazardous machinery until they are reasonably certain that SEROQUEL therapy does not affect them adversely. Priapism: One case of priapism in a patient receiving SEROQUEL has been reported ments, prior uses, to market and introduction. vestigatrs. The cited figures, however, do provide the prescribing physician with some basis for continue until the patient recovers. Wnile a causal relationship to use of SEROQUEL has not been established, other drugs etimating with alpha-adrenergic the relative contribution blockof drug and rondrug factors to the side effect incidence in the population studied. SEROQUEL is a registered traoemark of the AstraZeneca group ing effects have been reported to induce priapism, and it is possible that SEROQUEL Table may share 1, in te this full capacity. Prescribing Severe Information, …………………….,………—enumerates the ----------------------------------------- incidence, rounded to the --------------------------- nearest percent of --------------------------- treatment © AstraZeneca r—, 2004,2005 priapism may require surgical intervention. Body Temperature Regulation: a latlon: Although Although not not reported reported with with SEROQUEL, SEROQUEL, emergent emergent adverse adverse events events that that occurred occured during during acute acute therapy therapy of schizophrenia (up to 6 weeks) and bipolar mania (up 30198-001 Rev. 12/05

Dctowticiwl&eib6d0riability totrejd'xe/CQrevbcdyctewaiutelha&^aenjattribirted /cwtiedyctmipebturei hgs beenjgttributed to antipGyeinttrageWi Io antip$@dtrqtifciiflfotfeMie ixte1foirt^)ie.1%,ourore33>a!ief^ra®WiStRQuBlEl 1,otwe2f3>a|ielWr^^ 8lo$8rangi®Jibj^6toW)tiWjCwImiheid^^ore 8lo$8rangn®jibj^6tD clgAdayCwharWheicf§@l7£or terms of use, available at Wilmington, Delaware 19850-5437

elevated TSH leveis Of me SEROQUEL treated patients with elevated TSH levels, 3 had simultaneous low free T4 o t SSE ser0 ? u ,' l ra5 e I Panctellogls dapsndar®»: SEROQUEL has not wan systwnatloal^ studied. In animals or humans, tor Its paten-
