# The Neuropsychology of Amphetamine and Opiate Depe

Neuropsychol Rev (2007) 17:317-336 DOI 10.1007/sll065-007-9033-y The Neuropsychology of Amphetamine and Opiate Dependence: Implications for Treatment Karen D Ersche • Barbara J Sahakian Received: 11 April 2007/Accepted: 22 June 2007/Published online: 10 August 2007 © Springer Science + Business Media, LLC 2007

Abstract Chronic use of amphetamines and/or opiates has been associated with a wide range of cognitive deficits, involving domains of attention, inhibitory control, planning, decision-making, learning and memory. Although both amphetamine and opiate users show marked impairment in various aspects of cognitive function, the impairment profile is distinctly different according to the substance of abuse. In light of evidence showing that cognitive impairment in drug  
IDED IGT MRI WCST  
Intra-Dimensional/Extra-Dimensional set-shifting test Iowa Gambling Task magnetic resonance imaging Wisconsin Card Sorting Test

users has a negative impact on treatment engagement and efficacy, we review substance-specific deficits on executive and memory function, and discuss possibilities to address these during treatment intervention. Keywords Cognition ■ Executive function ■ Substance abuse ■ Amphetamines ■ Opiates ■ Cognitive enhancement Abbreviations  
Introduction According to United Nations estimates, approximately 200 million people worldwide were consuming illegal psychoactive substances at the beginning of the millennium (United Nations Office on Drugs and Crime 2003a). Although not everybody who takes drugs shows addictive behavior, such as compulsive drug seeking or loss of control over drug intake, the damaging effects of repeated drug use are undisputed (United Nations Office on Drugs

ACC ADHD BIS-11  
anterior cingulate cortex attention deficit hyperactivity disorder Barratt Impulsiveness Scale, version 11  
and Crime 2003b). Such harm includes acute and chronic health problems, caused directly by drug use or indirectly through drug-related accidents (WHO 2004). Furthermore,

CANTAB Cambridge Neuropsychological Test Automated Battery  
there is growing evidence that chronic drug use is associated with impaired cognitive function (see for review

CGT CPT  
Cambridge Gamble Task Continuous Performance Test  
Rogers and Robbins 2001, 2003; Verdejo-Garcia et al. 2004), which may contribute to negative long-term consequences observed in chronic drug users.

K. D. Ersche (S) ■ B. J. Sahakian School of Clinical Medicine, Department of Psychiatry, University of Cambridge, Brain Mapping Unit, Box 255, Addenbrooke’s Hospital, Cambridge, UK e-mail: ke220@cam.ac.uk K. D. Ersche ■ B. J. Sahakian Behavioural and Clinical Neurosciences Institute, University of Cambridge, Cambridge, UK  
The impact of chronic drug use on cognition has received relatively little attention until recently. Contemporary theories on the neuropathology of drug addiction have highlighted the involvement of cognitive functions such as memory, learning, attention, and inhibitory control in the development of drug dependence (Volkow et al. 2003, 2004a). Advances in the psychometric assessment of neuropsychological functions and computer-based applications of test batteries (e.g., the Cambridge Neuropsycho- © Springer

318 Neuropsychol Rev (2007) 17:317-336

logical Test Automated Battery (CANTAB; http://www. camcog.com ) have facilitated research into cognitive impairments associated with drug dependence, and allowed comparisons to be drawn with cognitive profiles observed in other clinical populations. The development of paradigms capable of being applied in both animals and in humans has opened up new avenues, as drug users’ behavior observed clinically can be modelled in animals, and findings in animals treated experimentally with drugs could be directly tested in humans (Robbins et al. 1994). Neuroimaging research such as functional magnetic resonance imaging (fMRI) and positron emission tomography (PET) have provided vital insight into the neural substrates and neurochemical processes subserving cognition and have shed light on disrupted neural network in chronic drug users (London et al. 2000; Volkow et al. 2004a). Comparisons of the cognitive profiles associated with the psychostimulants and narcotics is particularly interesting with regard to the different pharmacological actions and the distinct mechanisms of positive and negative reinforcement implicated in the development of amphetamine and opiate dependence. This article will provide a concise overview of the neuropathology associated with chronic amphetamine and opiate use, review the cognitive systems and their dysregulation by amphetamine and opiates, and will discuss possibilities of how cognitive deficits could be addressed in drug treatment. Neuropathology Associated with Chronic Amphetamine and Opiate Use Amphetamines and opiates are widely used (United Nations Office on Drugs and Crime 2003a), and both activate the dopamine system in the midbrain, which is associated with positive reinforcing effects, and therefore, have addictive potential (Di Chiara and Imperato 1986). However, the pharmacological actions of both substances can be differentiated. The acute pharmacological effects of amphetamines are to increase central monoamine neurotransmission by interaction with processes of transmitter release, uptake, and metabolism (Seiden et al. 1993, for review). Opiates, by contrast, exert action mainly through p-opioid receptors, indirectly increasing dopamine but decreasing noradrenaline levels (De Vries and Shippenberg 2002; Maldonado 1997). In view of the distinct pharmacological actions and reinforcement mechanisms implicated in amphetamine and opiate use (Bardo 1998, for review), the neuropathology in chronic users may be different. Growing evidence suggests that chronic amphetamine use results in long-lasting changes in dopamine neurotransmission, a neurotransmitter system critically implicated in motor, reward and cognitive functions, thereby contributing  
to a wide range of behavior patterns (Cools and Robbins 2004; Nieoullon 2002; Robbins 2005). Converging evidence from animal and human research indicates marked dopaminergic dysfunction as reflected by down-regulation of dopamine DI and D2 receptors, glucose metabolism (London et al. 2004; Volkow et al. 2001c; Wang et al. 2004), and perfusion (see for review Baicy and London 2007; Volkow et al. 2004b). Neuroimaging studies using structural MRI have provided further evidence that abnormalities associated with chronic amphetamine exposure are not only functional but also of a morphological nature. Profound reductions in gray matter have been identified in the cingulate, limbic, and paralimbic cortices and the inferior frontal gyrus (Thompson et al. 2004), while striatal volume is significantly increased (Chang et al. 2005; Jemigan et al. 2005). Although the neurotoxicity of amphetamines in humans is still a matter of debate, druginduced changes in the dopamine system may be dosedependent (Sung et al. 2007) and be long-lasting (Johanson et al. 2006; McCann et al. 1998; Sekine et al. 2001; Volkow et al. 2001b). Yet, there is converging evidence from studies investigating brain glucose metabolism, brain metabolites, and dopamine transporter density which suggests recovery from some of the drug-induced dopaminergic alterations following protracted abstinence (proton MRS: Nordahl et al. 2005; PET dopamine-ligand: Volkow et al. 2001b; FDGPET: Wang et al. 2004). Chronic opiate abuse has been associated with marked changes in the density of p-opioid receptors throughout the brain (Kling et al. 2000; Melichar et al. 2005). Although methadone is used as a substitute for heroin for the treatment of opiate-dependent individuals, the long-lasting effects between these two opiates differ. Thus, methadone administered in a maintenance regimen results in an upregulation of p-opioid receptors, which persists even after detoxification from opiates (Daglish and Nutt 2003); conversely post-mortem analyses of chronic heroin users have shown a down-regulation of p-opioid receptors (Gabilondo et al. 1994). Regarding monoamines neurotransmission, chronic opiate users has been associated with reduced densities in noradrenaline (a2) and dopamine (D2) receptors (Gabilondo et al. 1994; Wang et al. 1997), but no evidence for neurotoxic effects on dopamine neurons has been identified (Kish et al. 2001). In particular, the effects on the dopamine system overall in opiate users are less pronounced than in stimulant users (Kish et al. 2001). Functional and structural abnormalities in opiate users are less specific than those observed in amphetamine users (Danos et al. 1998a, 1998b; Gerra et al. 1998; Lyoo et al. 2006; Rose et al. 1996; Pezawas et al. 1998). In summary, neuropathological changes associated with chronic use of amphetamines have been well documented for the midbrain dopamine system and the ascending

Springer

Neuropsychol Rev (2007) 17:317-336 319

dopamingergic pathways. Accordingly, structural and functional anomalies in areas of dopamine pathways, the corticostriatal loops, have been identified in chronic amphetamine users, as measured by neuroimaging techniques. In contrast to the extensive research in psychostimulant users, the neuropathological changes in opiate users have been far less investigated to date. There is however, substantial evidence showing that chronic opiate use is associated with marked changes in the opioid system, while the dopamine system seems to be less affected. Abnormalities in brain structure and function appear to be less pronounced and less specific than in psychostimulant users. In light of differences in pharmacological actions of amphetamines and opiates, and in the neuropathology associated with chronic use of these substances, it may be anticipated that cognitive function would be more severely impaired in chronic users of amphetamines compared to chronic users of opiates. While this review will focus on the cognitive neuropathological changes associated with amphetamine and opiate dependence in neural networks subserving cognitive function, it should be noted that the adverse effects of chronic abuse of amphetamines and of opiates on the central nervous system are complex (Brust 1998; Neiman et al. 2000), making chronic drug users susceptible to numerous neurological complications which may also affect cognition. These include ischemic and haemorrhagic stroke (Buttner et al. 2000; Buxton & McConachie, 2000; Mathew & Wilson, 1991), cardiovascular problems such as myocardial infarction (Yu et al., 2003), and infectious diseases (Neaigus et al., 2007; Urbina & Jones, 2004). Medical complications are either directly related to the properties of the drug of choice, for example, immunosuppression caused by opiates (Sacerdote, 2006), increased cerebral blood flow caused by amphetamines (Russo et al., 1991), or produced by agents used for the ‘cutting’ of street drugs (Poulsen et al., 1996). Medical problems may also occur as a consequence of the pattern of drug use, for example, hypoxia following intravenous heroin use (Dursteler-MacFarland et al., 2000), or cardiac pathology following methamphetamine binges (Varner et al., 2002). Furthermore, the drug users’ nutritional status (Kumar, 2007; Virmani et al., 2006) and lifestyle may also account for some of the medical problems observed (e.g. a heightened risk of infectious diseases due to needle sharing or promiscuity [Neaigus et al., 2007; Urbina & Jones, 2004; Warner & Srinivasan, 2004]). The Profile of Cognitive Deficits Associated with Amphetamine and Opiate Dependence Executive functions represent high-level, dissociable cognitive abilities such as planning, working memory, atten-  
tional set shifting, and inhibition of prepotent responses, which are necessary for goal-directed behavior (Baddeley 1986; Burgess 1997). Executive dysfunction has generally been linked with a frontal lobe pathology (see both for review Elliott 2003; Robbins 1996), including chronic substance abuse (Rogers and Robbins 2001). In the following sections, impairments in selected executive and memory domains in chronic users of amphetamines and opiates are discussed. Cognitive Flexibility Cognitive flexibility has been defined as ‘the ability to shift avenues of thought and action in order to perceive, process, and respond to situations in different ways’ (Eslinger and Grattan 1993). The Wisconsin Cart Sorting Test (WCST) (Grant and Berg 1948) and the intra-dimensional/extradimensional (IDED) set-shifting task of the CANTAB test battery (Downes et al. 1989; Rogers et al. 2000b) both shown in Fig. 1, have been widely used to assess cognitive flexibility in laboratory settings. The latter paradigm specifically measures the ability to shift away from a previously relevant stimulus dimension towards a newly relevant dimension (i.e., extra-dimensional [ED]-shift), which is formally akin to a category shift on the WCST and has been associated with dorsolateral prefrontal cortex function (Konishi et al. 1998a; Rogers et al. 2000b). The IDED task, in particular, has proven suitable for translational medicine approach (Birrell and Brown 2000; Dias et al. 1997). Studies with current amphetamine/methamphetamine users have shown marginal to severe impairment on cognitive flexibility (Ersche et al. 2006a; Omstein et al. 2000; Simon et al. 2000), although these deficits were not evident in abstinent amphetamine/methamphetamine users (Hoffman et al. 2006). Interestingly, there is some evidence indicating that impaired cognitive flexibility in methamphetamine users is associated with male, but not with female gender (Kim et al. 2005b). This proposal finds support from experimental animal studies showing greater neurotoxic damage of methamphetamine to male than to female brains following administration of the same amount of the drug in animals of the same age (Wagner et al. 1993). It may therefore be that factors such as heavier drug use or an earlier age of onset only partly account for the more severe cognitive impairment in male methamphetamine users. Taken together, this may suggest that amphetamine exposure in male stimulant users acutely impairs the shifting of a mental set, while protracted abstinence from amphetamines may restore attentional set-shifting function. Compromised cognitive flexibility in abstinent methamphetamine users has been shown to be associated with decreased frontal white matter metabolism (Kim et al. (Ej Springer

320 Neuropsychol Rev (2007) 17:317-336

a Wisconsin Card SortingTest b CANTAB 2D IDED-Task Stages 1 & 2: Simple discrimination SHAPES Stage 3; Compound discrimination SHAPES  
2003), is interesting, given the relationship between performance and D2 receptor availability (Mehta et al. 1999, 2004; Volkow et al. 1998). One may speculate whether the improved task performance during protracted abstinence in amphetamine users is concomitant with recovery in dopamine transmission (Volkow et al. 2001b; Wang et al. 2004). In contrast to the findings in amphetamine users, most studies in current and former opiate users did not identify impairments on cognitive flexibility, suggesting that chronic opiate consumption does not have an impact on attentional set-shifting (Ersche et al. 2006a; Pau et al. 2002; Rotheram-Fuller et al. 2004; VerdejoGarcia et al. 2005; Verdejo-Garcia and Perez-Garcia 2006). The WCST and IDED tasks also assess the capacity to relearn a stimulus-reward association by inhibition of the previously reinforced dimension (i.e. reversal shift), which is subserved by orbitofrontal-striatal pathways (Dias et al. 1997; Rogers et al. 2000a). Neither amphetamine nor opiate users were measurably impaired on the reversal shift in the IDED task (Ersche et al. 2006a; Johanson et al. 2006; Omstein et al. 2000). Although impaired response reversal on the WCST is thought to reflect a high level of attentional disturbance compared with perseverative responding during

SHAPES SHAPES LINES  
Stages 4 & 5;Compound discrimination I w Staaes 6 & Z lntra-dimensional shift Stages 8 & £• Extra-dimensional shift  
reversal learning tasks (Nagahama et al. 2001), it is of note that neither amphetamine nor opiate users showed impairment in response reversal during a probabilistic response reversal learning task (Ersche et al. under review). However, it has to be acknowledged that some studies have reported increased perseverative responding on the WCST in methadone-maintained opiate users (Darke et al. 2000; Lyvers and Yakimoff 2003; Pirastu et al. 2006). Response perseveration on the WCST has been associated with early methadone withdrawal (Lyvers and Yakimoff 2003), comorbid alcohol dependence and previous heroin

Fig. 1 a In the Wisconsin Card Sorting Test, participants are presented with a deck of cards, showing stimuli that differ along the dimensions of color, shape and number. Participants are asked to match each of the cards of the deck to one of the stimulus cards A-D displayed in front of them. Feedback informs participants of the correctness of their choices. Successful matching requires the learning of a sorting rule and the adaptation of the matching strategy when the sorting rule changes, b In the CANTAB 2D-IDED task, participants are trained to discriminate stimuli that differ along the dimensions of shapes and lines. Feedback teaches participants which stimulus is correct, and after six correct responses, the stimuli and/or rules are changed. Shapes remain the relevant dimension (i.e., shifts are intra-dimensional within the same dimension) until stage 8, when the new dimension, the white lines, become the relevant dimension (i.e., extra-dimensional shift) 2005a) and reduced gray matter density in the middle frontal cortex (Kim et al. 2006). The fact that task performance improves with protracted drug abstinence (Kim et al. 2006), and may even reach normal level (Hoffman et al. 2006; Johanson et al. 2006; Toomey et al.  
overdoses (Darke et al. 2000) but does not seem to be a characteristic behavioral correlate of opiate dependence. Inhibitory Control A hallmark of drug dependence is the loss of control over substance intake, despite the negative consequences involved (American Psychiatric Association 1994). Lack of inhibition has been regarded as a key element of drug addiction, including the suppression of emotional, cognitive and behavioral responses (Goldstein and Volkow 2002; Jentsch and Taylor 1999). Inhibitory control can be investigated in the behavioral and cognitive domains. Behavioral Inhibition Behavioral or motor response inhibition is defined as the process required to stop a planned movement (see Aron et al.

Springer

Neuropsychol Rev (2007) 17:317-336 321

2004; Chamberlain and Sahakian 2007) and is assessed using paradigms such as the Go-Nogo or Stop-Signal Reaction Time task (Dougherty et al. 2003; Evenden 1999; Hom et al. 2003). As shown in Fig. 2b, in the GoNogo task, participants have to respond quickly to visual ‘go’ cues but suppress the prepared response whenever a ‘nogo’ cue occurs on the computer screen. The index of behavioral inhibition is the number of false responses on ‘nogo’ trials (i.e., commission errors), which has been associated with activation in inferior frontal gyrus (Chikazoe et al. 2007; Konishi et al. 1998b). To our knowledge, no neuroimaging studies have investigated the neural correlates during ‘go-nogo’ performance in methamphetamine users. Cocaine users, however, exhibit not only significant inhibition failure by making more false responses on ‘nogo’ trials than controls, but also show significant inattention to ‘go’ cues, as reflected in a higher rate of false misses (i.e., omission errors) (Kaufman et al. 2003). Interestingly, attenuated error-related activation in the anterior cingulate cortex (ACC) was detected during ‘go-nogo’ performance, suggesting disturbances in the processing of errors (Kaufman et al. 2003). Alternatively, the attenuated error-related activation may also indicate that cocaine users had difficulty differentiating target from nontarget stimuli, since the ACC is thought to play a key role in conflict and action monitoring (e.g. Carter et al. 1998; Gehring and Knight 2000). Remarkably, task-related activation in regions that have previously been implicated in behavioral inhibition during ‘go-nogo’ performance, such as the right inferior frontal gyrus, did not differ between cocaine users and controls. Thus, it is not clear whether inhibition failure during ‘go-nogo’ performance  
reflects attentional problems and/or inefficient inhibitory control. The Stop-Signal task, in contrast to the Go-Nogo task, does not involve switching between target and non-target stimuli, but requires participants to respond quickly to ‘go’ cues unless they hear a beep (in 25% of trials), which provides the signal to suppress this prepared motor response (see Fig. 2a). The stop-signal reaction time indexes the time that an individual needs to withhold the prepotent response, which is associated with the integrity of the right inferior frontal gyrus (Aron et al. 2004; Chamberlain and Sahakian 2007; Rubia et al. 2003). Both methamphetamine and cocaine users have a significantly longer stopping process than controls, as reflected by a significantly longer stopsignal reaction time, suggesting that response inhibition is compromised in psychostimulant users independently from attentional processing (Fillmore and Rush 2002; Monterosso et al. 2005). Inhibition failure on the Stop-Signal task is associated with the previous amount of methamphetamine consumed (Monterosso et al. 2005), and may reflect dosedependent neuroadaptive changes underlying poor behavioral inhibition in chronic users of methamphetamine. Indeed, functional and structural abnormalities have been identified in the inferior frontal gyrus in methamphetamine users (Thompson et al. 2004; Volkow et al. 2001a), which fuel speculation that disruptions in the neural network involving the inferior frontal gyrus may underlie the poor behavioral inhibitory control in chronic methamphetamine users (Monterosso et al. 2005). In contrast to the accumulating evidence for response inhibition impairments in chronic psychostimulant users (e.g., Hester and Garavan 2004; Hester et al. 2007; Fillmore and

Fig. 2 a In the Stop-Signal task, participants are presented with a series of stimuli and are instructed to press the button on the left of the response panel when the arrow on the screen is pointing to the left, and to press the button on the right when the arrow is pointing to the right. After a practice session of 16 ‘go’ trials, participants are instructed to withhold their responses when they hear a stop-signal (which occurs in 25% of the trials in the form of an auditory ‘beep’ sound-a 300 Hz tone), b In the Go-Nogo task, participants are presented with a series of letters, and are instructed to press a button as quickly and accurately as possible in response to any letter presented except to the letter X  
a Stop-Signal Task  
b Go-Nogo Task Springer

322 Neuropsychol Rev (2007) 17:317-336

Rush 2002; Kaufman et al. 2003; Monterosso et al. 2005), the majority of studies did not find behavioral inhibition deficits in opiate users (Forman et al. 2004; Fishbein et al. 2007; Lee et al. 2005; Verdejo-Garcia et al. 2007). Cognitive Inhibition In the cognitive domain, inhibitory control is frequently assessed by the Stroop test (Stroop 1992), which requires participants to suppress a salient but conflicting stimulus property while identifying a less salient one (e.g., reading the word ‘blue’ that is written in red ink requires more cognitive effort, so-called interference control, than reading the word ‘blue’ when written in blue ink). Neuroimaging research has shown that the ACC is critically involved in the detection of the conflict between task-relevant and taskirrelevant stimulus properties during the Stroop task (Bench et al. 1993; Leung et al. 2000; Pardo et al. 1990). Growing evidence indicates that cognitive control is compromised in both amphetamine (Salo et al. 2002, 2007; Simon et al. 2002) and opiate users (Fishbein et al. 2007; Mintzer and Stitzer 2002; Prosser et al. 2006; Verdejo-Garcia et al. 2007). For example, poor interference control has been associated with decreased concentrations of N-acetylaspartate in the ACC in methamphetamine users (Salo et al. 2007; Taylor et al. 2004), which has been considered a marker of neuronal loss (Tsai and Coyle 1995). This finding is in keeping with the structural and functional abnormalities in the ACC previously observed in methamphetamine users (Hwang et al. 2006; London et al. 2004, 2005; Nordahl et al. 2002; Thompson et al. 2004), elucidating the underpinnings of the impaired ability to effectively monitor situations of conflict in this drug user group (Salo et al. 2005). Some studies, however, did not find impaired interference control in recently abstinent methamphetamine users (Chang et al. 2002; Hoffman et al. 2006; Kalechstein et al. 2003), which may suggest partial recovery of brain function following abstinence from methamphetamine (Nordahl et al. 2005; Wang et al. 2004). Profound impairment in suppressing conflicting information on the standard color Stroop task has been identified in opiate users (Fishbein et al. 2007; Mintzer and Stitzer 2002; Prosser et al. 2006; Verdejo-Garcia et al. 2007). The type of opiate used does not seem to influence performance on the Stoop task (Gruber et al. 2006; Verdejo-Garcia et al. 2005). Given the key role of the ACC in conflict monitoring, one may speculate that dysfunction in this area also accounts for the poor performance on the Stroop test in opiate users. Indeed, there is now growing evidence suggesting that ACC function may be compromised in opiate users (Ersche et al. 2006b; Forman et al. 2004; Lee et al. 2005; Yucel et al. 2007). For example, opiate users showed attenuated error-related activation in the ACC during the  
Go-Nogo task (Forman et al. 2004) and lack a normal relationship between activation of ACC and adaptive responding to negative feedback (Ersche et al. 2006b) and to errors (Yucel et al. 2007). Reduced levels of the metabolite N-acetylaspartate have also been reported in chronic opiate users (Haselhorst et al. 2002; Yucel et al. 2007), but in contrast to methamphetamine users (Salo et al. 2007), these abnormalities were not associated with behavioral performance. At present, the nature of underlying biochemical abnormalities such as the significant reductions in N-acetylaspartate in chronic drug users is still unclear. Given that the ACC has a high density of opioid receptors (see Vogt et al. 1995), and has been implicated in opioid analgesia (Casey et al. 2000; Petrovic et al. 2002), it seems conceivable that chronic exposure to opiate agonists such as methadone and heroin, modulates ACC function during cognitively challenging tasks such as the Stroop task. Previous research has shown that task-related activation during the Stroop task overlaps with the neural network involved in processing of pain (Derbyshire et al. 1998) and opioid analgesia respectively (Petrovic et al. 2002). Sustained Attention Sustained attention characterizes a state of ‘readiness to detect rarely and unpredictably occurring signals over prolonged periods of time’ (Sarter et al. 2001) and has frequently been assessed by various versions of the Continuous Performance Test (CPT) (see Borgaro et al. 2003). In this test, participants are required to maintain vigilance and to react when target stimuli are presented but to avoid responding when distractors occur. Performance is usually assessed by signal detection index (d r ) which takes into account the number of missed targets and the number of false alarms. London et al. (2005) has recently shown that methamphetamine users made significantly more errors on an auditory version of the CPT than non-drug taking controls. Most importantly, the authors found that d’ was significantly smaller in methamphetamine users than in controls, providing evidence for impairments in methamphetamine users’ ability to discriminate targets from nontargets. Poor test performance was further reflected in abnormal glucose metabolism in the ACC, insula and orbitofrontal cortex at rest. Interestingly, compared with controls, glucose metabolism in the ACC was significantly reduced, and correlated negatively with the recent amount of methamphetamine used (London et al. 2004). Methamphetamine users with relatively elevated glucose metabolism at rest made significantly fewer errors during the task (London et al. 2005). This may suggest that drug users with a smaller consumption of methamphetamine were able to compensate for an underlying neuropathology; a plausible

Springer

Neuropsychol Rev (2007) 17:317-336 323

proposal given that methamphetamine-induced neural damage in the frontal lobe, including the ACC, has shown to be dose-dependent (Oh et al. 2005; Sung et al. 2007). It is important to note that the aforementioned group differences on the CPT became only apparent over a 30-minute testing session (London et al. 2005), but not during a 15-minute session (London et al. 2004), which suggests that methamphetamine users are to some extent able to compensate for the underlying neuropathology. Although the length of the administered version of the CPT is likely to determine the detection of deficits in sustained attention in stimulant users, the nature of the impairments identified is still unknown. It is important to acknowledge that not all studies find impairments in measures of signal detection (cT) on the CPT in stimulant users. For example, Levine et al. (2006) identified inattentiveness in stimulant users by increased numbers of omission errors and great reaction time variability, although measures of discrimination targets and non-targets did not differ from controls. In light of the dose-dependent effects of methamphetamine on ACC, one may speculate whether the type of stimulants used (i.e., amphetamine versus cocaine) or the pattern of drug use (i.e., chronic versus recreational use) might account for differences in performance profiles observed. Although poor performance in the detection of targets has repeatedly been found in methadone-maintained opiate users (Forman et al. 2004; Mintzer and Stitzer 2002), relatively little is known about the underlying neuropathology of these impairments in opiate users. Abnormalities in glucose metabolism and brain metabolites in the ACC of opiate users have been reported (Galynker et al. 2000; Yucel et al. 2007) and it is conceivable that opiate users need to compensate for ACC dysfunction in order to meet attentional demands. Functional MRI studies in opiate users have provided preliminary evidence for this assertion, since task related under-activation of the ACC has been associated with deficits in the detection of targets (Forman et al. 2004). Normal task-related activation in the ACC, concomitant with additional recruitment of brain regions that are not typically activated by non-drug users, however, is associated with normal performance in opiate users (Yucel et al. 2007). Although attentional dysfunction has repeatedly been identified in laboratory settings (Forman et al. 2004; Mintzer and Stitzer 2002), driving ability (which requires sustained attention) is considered to be intact in chronic opiate users (Fishbain et al. 2003; Stout and Farrell 2003). It may be that the compensatory recruitment of brain areas enables opiate users to drive safely without being involved in significantly more road accidents than non-drug users (see Fishbain et al. 2003). In summary, more research is needed to better understand the engagement of neural networks during forms of attentional processing in opiate dependent individuals.  
Strategic Planning The ability to ‘think ahead’ and actively search for an appropriate solution is an essential part of goal directed behavior, and is required in many daily activities (Owen 1997). The Tower of London test (Shallice 1982; Owen et al. 1990), or the more difficult version, the one-touch Tower of London (Owen et al. 1995), are widely used means to assess strategic planning in laboratory settings. Multiple lines of evidence indicate that planning performance on the Tower of London is subserved by a neural network including the dorsolateral prefrontal cortex (Baker et al. 1996; Dagher et al. 2001; Manes et al. 2002). Both amphetamine and opiate users, regardless of current drug status, solved significantly fewer problems correctly on the one-touch Tower of London, and therefore needed more attempts in order to generate correct answers compared to controls (Ersche et al. 2006a; Omstein et al. 2000). This behavioral deficit occurred in the absence of latency differences between the groups and, as such, was not secondary to motor impulsivity (Ersche et al. 2006a). Whilst amphetamine and opiate users were equally impaired on planning problems of medium and high levels of difficulty, amphetamine users also struggled with generating solutions for the relatively easy three-move problems (Ersche et al. 2006a). The first stages of the Tower of London (i.e., oneto three-move problems) require relatively little planning ability, since they can easily be solved by a visual matching-to-sample strategy (Owen 1997). In light of accumulating evidence showing that basic visuospatial function, as assessed by the Rey-Osterrieth Complex Figure Test (see Stem et al. 1994), is not impaired in amphetamine users (Chang et al. 2005; Hoffman et al. 2006; Kalechstein et al. 2003; Toomey et al. 2003), it is conceivable that the poor performance of amphetamine users at this low level of difficulty may reflect either an over-confident approach towards the solution or an inefficiency in concentrating on the task demands. High-level cognitive planning, as assessed on the Tower of London by planning problems requiring mental organization of four to six-sequences of moves, overlaps with different aspects of working memory (Owen 1997; Robbins et al. 1998). Therefore, it may not be surprising that amphetamine and opiate users have also shown poor performance on tasks requiring complex spatial working memory function and visuo-spatial strategy generation (Omstein et al. 2000). The marked impairment in solving planning problems on the Tower of London exemplifies the difficulty of drug users to mentally organize behavior to achieve a goal through a series of intermediate steps. The fact that planning impairment was not only observed in current users of amphetamine and opiates but also in a group of former drug users who had been drug abstinent for an average of eight years, may indicate that impairments do Cj Springer

324 Neuropsychol Rev (2007) 17:317-336

not simply reflect the current effect of the drug. Longitudinal studies are needed to settle the question whether neurocognitive impairment was caused by chronic drug exposure or predated drug-taking, or even represents a combination of both. Lack of planning and forethought has also been considered being a component of impulsive behavior (Dickman 1990; Evenden 1999). As a personality  
a  
The Iowa Gambling Task 'Risky' Decks 'Safe' Decks c D

trait, non-planning is assessed by subscale of the Barratt Impulsiveness Scale (BIS-11) (Patton et al. 1995). Both chronic amphetamine users and opiate users not only report  
J, k_ \--------- / …….. 7  
/

higher overall levels of impulsivity compared with nonGain per card $ 50

drug using controls, they also score higher on the nonplanning subscale of BIS-11 (Clark et al. 2006). In light of the poor performance during strategic planning, one may speculate whether this impairment may contribute to the impulsive behavior pattern frequently reported by chronic drug users.  
Loss per 10 cards $ 250 Netto per 10 cards +$ 250 \__  
7

b The Cambridge Risk Task

Decision-Making The ability to make decisions is a key element in human behavior because the way people behave socially, financially, ecologically, and politically largely depends on this ability (Hastie 2001; Mellers et al. 1998). Because decisions are usually made with a view to a favorable outcome, rewards provide the motivation to make decisions. Cognition is necessary to appraise the options and alternatives, assessing the means to achieve them and evaluate the consequences involved with each choice (Ernst and Paulus 2005; Hastie 2001). Neuropsychological studies have been investigating decision-making abilities in chronic drug users with  
/ < Playing safe (small reward)  
Playing risky (large reward)

different experimental paradigms, providing evidence that decision-making performance differs between the type of substance used. For example, the Iowa Gambling Task (IGT) (Bechara et al. 1997), shown in Fig. 3a, requires a series of card selections to be made concerning winning and losing monetary rewards. Optimal performance requires switching from selecting cards from high gain/ high loss decks to low gain/low loss but more profitable decks. The main measure is the net-score, which is calculated from the total number of cards selected from the two advantageous minus the two disadvantageous decks, reflecting the decision-making strategy across the task. There are inconsistencies in drug users’ decisionmaking strategies on the IGT across studies, and not all report the net-score. Among those studies that report the net-score, some did not find a measurable decision-making impairment in psychostimulant, opiate, and polydrug users (Adinoff et al. 2003; Bolla et al. 2003; Ernst et al. 2003; Mintzer and Stitzer 2002; Mintzer et al. 2005), whereas others found significantly smaller but positive net-scores in  
Fig. 3 a In the Iowa Gambling task, participants are presented with four card decks and asked to make series of card selections concerning winning and losing monetary rewards. Participants are not told that there are ‘safe’ and ‘risky’ decks. Over the course of the task, participants generally develop a preference for the ‘safe’ decks (C and D) over the risky decks (A and B). The net-score, which is calculated from the total number of cards selected from ‘safe’ minus ‘risky’ decks, reflects the decision-making strategy across the task, b The Risk Task requires participants to choose between two mutually exclusive options with different probabilities of reward and punishment. On each trial, an array of six boxes is presented on the screen, with a ratio of red and blue boxes that varies from trial to trial (5:1, 4:2, 3:3 boxes). Participants are told that the computer had hidden a yellow token, at random, behind one of the six boxes and they need to decide whether the token is hidden behind a red or blue box. Their decision on each trial is shaped by a fixed bet, associated with each alternative, regarding the magnitude of potential gain or loss (90:10, 80:20, 70:30; 60:40, 50:50 points). Feedback is provided by the way of gain or loss of points following each trial. Since the least likely option is always associated with the large reward value, participants are facing a reward-conflict situation

Springer

Neuropsychol Rev (2007) 17:317-336 325

these groups of drug users compared with controls (Bechara et al. 2001; Grant et al. 2000; Pirastu et al. 2006; VerdejoGarcia and Perez-Garcia 2006), reflecting a disadvantageous decision-making strategy. It seems that only subgroups of polydrug users (Bechara et al. 2002) and subgroups of opiate users (Rotheram-Fuller et al. 2004; Pirastu et al. 2006) have negative net-scores, indicating that these drug users preferably chose cards from the ‘risky decks.’ Negative net-scores have also been identified in other clinical groups, for example in suicide attempters, independently from their drug using habits (Jollant et al. 2005) and in psychopathic individuals (Mitchell et al. 2002 e.g.; van Honk et al. 2002). Interestingly, Vassileva et al. (2007) have recently shown significant differences in decision-making strategies between psychopathic and nonpsychopathic opiate users. While the psychopathic opiate users consistently selected cards from risky decks, the nonpsychopathic opiate users successfully adjusted their decision-making strategy in the course of the task toward the advantageous decks. This selection strategy suggests difficulties in the learning reward-contingencies, which at the beginning of the task have resulted in risky decisions. Taken together, accumulating evidence indicates that drug abuse per se does not mediate decision-making on the IGT but it may act as a moderator, aggravating existing decision-making impairments. One major drawback of the IGT is that volunteers need to leam reward-punishment associations over the course of the task, which means that individuals who are poor learners may develop a less successful decision-making strategy than good learners (Clark and Robbins 2002). Consequently, the Cambridge Gamble Task (CGT) (Rogers et al. 1999a) and the Risk Task (Rogers et al. 1999b) have been developed to investigate decision-making independently from learning. In the CGT, participants make choices between two mutually exclusive options and place bets on the expected outcome. Learning on the CGT is obviated by providing information about outcome probabilities and reward values on the screen and by the fact that each trial is independent from its predecessor. The Risk Task is a variant of the CGT, which investigates decision-making in a reward-conflict situation (see Fig. 3b). Research findings regarding decision-making in chronic drug users, using either the CGT or the Risk Task, are strikingly similar to findings on the IGT. Chronic amphetamine users, but not opiate users, showed disadvantageous decision-making (Rogers et al. 1999a). Amphetamine users overall selected the likely small reward option less frequently (i.e., in only 85% of trials) than opiate users (92%) and controls (95%), but showed no signs of impaired risk adjustment (Rogers et al. 1999a). In other words, although amphetamine users chose disadvantageously, they neither increased their gambles on the less favorable options nor did they significantly choose  
against the odds on the risky conditions. Disadvantageous decision-making strategy in amphetamine users on the CGT and Risk Task appears to be due to impairment in correctly estimating outcome probabilities and may not reflect a reward-seeking strategy per se. This proposal finds support from neuroimaging research, showing that methamphetamine users were not different regarding the sensitivity to positive or negative feedback, but showed disruptions in the neural network implicated in processing of feedback information, on the basis of which outcome probabilities were estimated (Paulus et al. 2002, 2003). Disadvantageous choices particularly in amphetamine users were also evident on the Risk Task (Ersche et al. 2005a, 2005b). For example, in a neuroimaging study, amphetamine users selected the most favorable option in 72% of trials (opiate: 82%, and exdrug: 79%, controls: 87%) (Ersche et al. 2005a). Although this difference was not statistically significant, the neuroimaging data revealed significant disturbance in the mediation of decision-making by the prefrontal cortex in all three drug user groups. Chronic amphetamine or opiate users, regardless of whether they were currently using drugs, showed over-activation in the orbitofrontal cortex and under-activation in the dorsolateral prefrontal cortex. These findings are consistent with other neuroimaging studies in drug users (e.g., Bolla et al. 2003), showing abnormal brain activation during decision-making, even before impairment becomes behaviorally measurable. At present, the nature of impaired decision-making in drug users is still unclear. There is some evidence that working-memory deficits adversely affect performance on the IGT (Bechara and Martin 2004). Sub-optimal choices on the CGT and Risk Task have been linked with the duration of amphetamine use (Rogers et al. 1999a) and the previous amount of daily cocaine use (Monterosso et al. 2001) , which might indicate an adverse effect of chronic stimulant use on probability estimations. Risky choices on the Risk task have been associated with low intelligence in poly drug users (Fishbein et al. 2005), while risky rewardseeking on the IGT has been related to abnormalities in anticipatory skin conductance responses, prior to card selections from the ‘risky decks’ (Bechara et al. 1997). Polydrug users who showed risky card selections on a discounting version of the IGT had abnormal anticipatory skin conductance responses, reflecting a hypersensitivity to reward and a hyposensitivity to punishment (Bechara et al. 2002) . This pattern of abnormal skin conductance responses has been interpreted as an inability to utilize ongoing feedback in guiding future decisions (Bechara et al. 2002). Leland and Paulus (2005) investigated risky decisionmaking in young people, who had experiences with illicit stimulants. Volunteers had to quickly decide whether to accept a small but safe bet, or to wait in prospect of a larger reward or penalty. Risky choices in young people, Springer

326 Neuropsychol Rev (2007) 17:317-336

regardless of whether they were consuming stimulants, were associated with personality traits of sensation seeking and motor impulsivity. They further found that although young people with a history of stimulant use made riskier choices throughout the task than their drug-naive counterparts, they showed normal responses to negative feedback (Leland and Paulus 2005). The authors suggested that the increased risk-taking behavior in young stimulant users reflects a hypersensitivity to reward but normal sensitivity to punishment. This decision-making strategy stands in sharp contrast to the risky decision-making observed in methadone-maintained opiate users. Although the overall decision-making performance in opiate users was not measurably impaired (Ersche et al. 2005a; Ersche et al. 2005b; Rogers et al. 1999a), methadone-maintained opiate users were significantly more likely to make risky decisions when they had been unsuccessful on the previous trial (Ersche et al. 2005b). In other words, only those opiate users who were maintained on methadone were less inclined to ‘play safe’ when they had lost on the previous trial; street heroin users, amphetamine users and former drug users all showed normal responses to punishing feedback (see Fig. 4). Since the two opiate groups were matched on other descriptive variables, one possible explanation of this finding may be the type of the opiate used. Several possible explanations for  
the abnormal responses of methadone users have been proposed, including a down-regulation of noradrenaline, altering the perception of risk and a dysregulation in processing of punishment (Ersche et al. 2005b). Nevertheless, further research is warranted to elucidate the adverse influence of methadone on feedback processing. In summary, accumulating evidence has shown that chronic consumption of amphetamines and opiates is associated with difficulties in making decisions, which can involve negative consequences. Neuroimaging studies have provided strong evidence for neural network disruptions during decision-making, even in the absence of detectable behavioral impairments on some paradigms (e.g., Bolla et al. 2003; Ersche et al. 2005a, 2006b; Paulus et al. 2005). The quality of decision-making in chronic amphetamine and opiate users may depend upon the cognitive demands that the decisional strategy requires. Cognitive deficits that adversely affect decisional choices have been shown to be associated with chronic amphetamine and opiate use, such as impaired learning of stimulus reward associations, probability judgements, reflection, and feedback processing. There are a variety of moderator variables, such as young age (Deakin et al. 2004), low intelligence quotient (Fishbein et al. 2005), affective instability (Jollant et al. 2005, 2007), low levels of cortisol (van Honk et al. 2003),

Fig. 4 The graph shows how feedback modulates ongoing decisionmaking differentially in current and former users of amphetamine and opiates on the Risk Task. Individual difference scores (computed by subtracting likely choices following a win from likely choices following a loss) reflect whether the likely option was chosen preferably following positive or negative feedback. As can be seen in the graph, negative  
feedback induced greater risk-taking than positive feedback in the methadone group but not in any of the other groups. This differential effect of task feedback on decision-making was significantly greater in methadone maintained opiate users than in controls (p= 0.003) and street heroin users (p=0.010); (see Ersche et al. 2005b), printed with permission from the nature publishing group

Springer

Neuropsychol Rev (2007) 17:317-336 327

or sensation seeking (Leland and Paulus 2005), which may exacerbate decision-making problems in individuals with substance use disorders. Memory and Learning A substantial body of evidence has shown a wide range of learning and memory impairments in chronic amphetamine and methamphetamine users (Ersche et al. 2006a; Gonzalez et al. 2004; Hoffman et al. 2006; Kalechstein et al. 2003; Moon et al. 2007; Omstein et al. 2000; Rippeth et al. 2004; Simon et al. 2002; Woods et al. 2005). Memory impairment in chronic amphetamine users is related to self-reported severity of drug use (McKetin and Mattick 1998) and correlates with the availability of dopamine transporters in the striatum (Volkow et al. 2001d). There is evidence that verbal memory performance improves following protracted drug abstinence (Wang et al. 2004). Woods et al. (2005) have shown that memory impairment in methamphetamine users is not necessarily due to mnemonic dysfunction but may result from inefficient strategies in encoding, organizing and retrieving information. Impairment in memory function associated with chronic opiate users is less consistent in the literature: while a number of studies identified various aspects of memory impairment such as word/pattem recognition, learning and recall of words/figures, episodic memory, paired associate learning and retrieval (Amir and Bahri 1994; Darke et al. 2000; Ersche et al. 2006a; Fishbein et al. 2007; Guerra et al. 1987; Omstein et al. 2000; Papageorgiou et al. 2004; Pirastu et al. 2006; Prosser et al. 2006), others do not find memory deficits in opiate users (Davis et al. 2002; Mintzer et al. 2005; Rapeli et al. 2006; Rounsaville et al. 1982). The reasons for these inconsistencies are less clear but may be related to clinical differences between the samples or test sensitivity. Although most studies do not find associations with the amount of opiates consumed or the duration of use (Darke et al. 2000; Ersche et al. 2006a; Prosser et al. 2006; Rounsaville et al. 1982; Verdejo-Garcia et al. 2005), there is some evidence that methadone impairs episodic memory in a dose-dependent manner (Curran et al. 2001). For example, methadone-maintained opiate users showed significantly better episodic memory recall when they received placebo instead of their usual methadone treatment (Curran et al. 2001). It is not clear if the impairments were specific for methadone or reflect opiate-related impairment, in general. By contrast, improved memory function has been reported in a within-subject comparison, following two months of enrollment in methadone-maintenance treatment (Gruber et al. 2006). However, further validation would be welcome because this study lacked a placebo condition and did not control for potential practice effects.  
Summary and General Comments Chronic separate and combined use of amphetamines and opiates is associated with a wide a range of cognitive deficits, including the domains of attention, inhibitory control, planning, decision-making, learning and memory. Although both amphetamine users and opiate users show marked impairment in various aspects of cognitive function, substance-specific differences are most pronounced in functions of inhibitory control and feedback processing. For example, while amphetamine users demonstrate profound deficits in suppressing planned actions (behavioral inhibition) and thoughts (cognitive inhibition), impairment in inhibitory control in opiate users appears to be limited to the cognitive domain. Chronic use of amphetamines has also shown to be associated with disturbances in the neural network implicated in feedback processing, which may cause difficulties predicting outcome probabilities. In opiate users, by contrast, the impairment in the processing of feedback seems to be specific to feedback of negative valence, such as errors and punishment. Compromised cognitive function in both substance-user populations is reflected in abnormal patterns of brain activation both at rest and during cognitive performance. Although this review did not discuss gender differences, there is accumulating evidence indicative of differences in brain structure and function between male and female stimulant users (Chang et al. 2005; Ersche et al. 2006a; Kim et al. 2005b; Stout et al. 2005). Gender differences in brain function in chronic opiate users have, to our knowledge, not been reported. Clinical Implications of Cognitive Deficits in Chronic Drug Users A substantial body of evidence has identified cognitive dysfunction in chronic drug users, including those using stimulants and opiates. However, despite the increasing knowledge of cognitive dysfunction in this population, cognitive abilities of drug users still play a peripheral role in clinical practice, as reflected in the most recent U.K. Department of Health’s Guidelines on Substance Dependence (1999). In light of the growing need for improving treatment efficacy, in particular for psychostimulant users (de Lima et al. 2002; Shearer 2007), addressing cognitive deficits within treatment settings may prove beneficial in three regards. Cognitive Function Moderates Treatment Retention and Efficacy Accumulating evidence has documented the moderating role of neurocognitive function on treatment retention and Cj Springer

328 Neuropsychol Rev (2007) 17:317-336

treatment efficacy, such that drug users with cognitive impairments are more likely to drop out of treatment early and show less engagement in the treatment process (Aharonovich et al. 2003, 2006; FalsStewart and Schafer 1992; FalsStewart and Lucente 1994a; Katz et al. 2005; Morgenstern and Bates 1999; Teichner et al. 2002). Consequently, the adaptation of treatment to meet the drug users’ cognitive needs is a necessary prerequisite if individuals with cognitive impairment are to benefit from treatment intervention. By way of example, drug counseling that makes use of mapping techniques, which addresses drug users’ problems in planning and problem solving by visualising and organizing information, has been shown to improve treatment outcome significantly (Czuchry and Dansereau 2003b; Dansereau and Dees 2002; Pitre et al. 1996). Various strategies developed previously to remediate cognitive dysfunction in patients with traumatic head injuries, are equally suitable for use in cognitively impaired drug users, and could be implemented in treatment settings without major difficulty (see Weinstein and Shaffer 1993 for extensive review). Adjusting interventions to the cognitive abilities of drug users may not only be beneficial for the achievement of treatment goals, but could also improve communication and relationships between drug users and staff (Weinstein and Shaffer 1993). Cognitive Assessment on Admission Useful for Clinical Decision-Making Standardized cognitive status examination on admission to identify the individual’s strengths and impairments would provide valuable information for clinical decision-making. Allocation of treatment intervention that meets the drug user’s individual profile has received increased attention in recent years (see Gastfriend and McLellan 1997). Most approaches aiming to match patients to treatment intervention have focused on demographic, social and psychiatric variables (e.g., McLellan et al. 1997). However, growing evidence suggests that cognitive dysfunction in drug users interacts with both pharmacotherapy and psychotherapy (Block et al. 2003; Jaffe et al. 1996), and should be taken into consideration during clinical decision-making. For example, alcohol dependent individuals with poor cognitive function and high levels of craving seem to respond particularly well to pharmacological treatment relative to placebo (Jaffe et al. 1996), and benefit more from inpatient than outpatient care (Rychtarik et al. 2000). Low levels of verbal learning appear to impede psychotherapy but do not affect the efficacy of supportive treatment such as coping skill training (Jaffe et al. 1996). Neurocognitive assessment would help with identification of an individuals’ strengths and weaknesses, and assist in determining which intervention would be most beneficial (Tapert et al. 1999, 2004).  
Objective indicators of cognitive function would also improve drug workers’ understanding of drug users’ problems in everyday activities (Verdejo-Garcia and Perez-Garcia 2007). In fact, an objective cognitive status examination is more likely to reflect the extent of impairment than a counselors’ subjective judgement on drug users’ cognitive abilities (FalsStewart 1997). An emphasis on neuropsychological aspects of assessment and treatment would be very useful in the training of staff working in drug services, but at present neuropsychology is still leading only a shadowy existence in current drug addiction training (Boys et al. 1997; Kerwin et al. 2006). Neurocognitive Training and Remediation to Improve Long-Term Outcome Improvement in cognitive function through neurocognitive training and remediation, as part of drug rehabilitation, may enhance treatment outcome in the long-term. Cognitive training modules have already shown effectiveness in a variety of clinical groups, including patients with schizophrenia (Bell et al. 2005; Hogarty et al. 2004; Kosten et al. 2006; Wykes et al. 2003), traumatic brain injury (Sarajuuri et al. 2005), and chronic drug users (Czuchry and Dansereau 2003a; FalsStewart and Lucente 1994b). In particular, the training of attention and memory skills, functions that are severely impaired in both amphetamine and opiate users, may prove useful, since these abilities have the greatest predictive value for the employment of drug users (Mackin et al. 2005). Cognitive remediation programs in patients with schizophrenia have shown promising results, since improvement in cognitive function at six-month follow up was not only reflected in successful vocational rehabilitation but was also associated with ameliorated social functioning and quality of life (Bell et al. 2005; Wykes et al. 2003). Options for Pharmacological Intervention In light of the severity of cognitive deficits that can occur in chronic drug users, the application of cognitive enhancer drugs to ameliorate these deficits appears useful (Duka et al. 2005; Malcolm et al. 2002). Cognition-enhancing drugs such as modafinil have shown efficacy ameliorating cognitive inhibition on the Stroop task in depressed patients (DeBattista et al. 2004), enhancing cognitive flexibility on the IDED task in patients with schizophrenia (Turner et al. 2004b), and improving motor-inhibition deficits on the Stop-Signal task in adults with attention deficit hyperactivity disorder (ADHD) (Turner et al. 2004a). Neuroimaging research suggests that modafinil has the potential to modulate activation in the ACC during working memory performance (Spence et al. 2005); an intriguing finding in

Springer

Neuropsychol Rev (2007) 17:317-336 329

light of significant under-activation during cognitive performance (Forman et al. 2004; Paulus et al. 2003) and at rest (Galynker et al. 2000; Kim et al. 2005b). Modafinil is an anti-narcoleptic agent with mild stimulant effects through classical (al-receptor) and non-classical (orexin/ hypocretin) arousal pathways (Ballon and Feifel 2006; Ferraro et al. 1999). The weak dopaminergic affinity of modafinil and the low abuse liability resulting from it (Deroche-Gamonet et al. 2002; O’Brien et al. 2006) may provide ideal grounds for a supplementary treatment of chronic drug users (Malcolm et al. 2002; Vocci et al. 2005). Clinical trials are now needed to establish modafinil’s efficacy in enhancing cognitive function in drug users with diminished cognitive abilities, and to identify those individuals for whom treatment with modafinil may not be suitable, e.g., drug users with co-morbid anxiety disorder (Taneja et al. 2007). Another potential route for improving cognitive function in chronic drug users is atomoxetine, a selective noradrenaline reuptake inhibitor (Bymaster et al. 2002), which has been found to be effective in the treatment of ADHD (Michelson et al. 2001). Atomoxetine has shown to selectively increase catecholamine levels in frontal lobes via noradrenaline transporters, but compared to psychostimulants, has low abuse liability (Bymaster et al. 2002). In light of atomoxetine’s efficacy in improving behavioral inhibition in healthy volunteers as well as in individuals with ADHD (Chamberlain et al. 2007), potential use in chronic drug users awaits investigation. In summary, growing evidence suggests that addressing cognitive deficits in drug users in treatment settings offers great potential to improve overall treatment efficacy. The variety of options available for managing cognitive dysfunction may allow implementation in different kinds of clinical settings. Most important, all aforementioned ways in addressing cognitive impairments in drug users are not mutually exclusive. It is even conceivable that the most effective means is a combined approach of psychological strategies, remediation training, and cognition-enhancer drugs. Summary and Outlook Over recent years, neuropsychology has provided new insights into the neural basis of cognitive and behavioral problems associated with chronic drug use, including amphetamines and opiates. The translation of this knowledge into clinical practice will ideally become increasingly apparent in the coming years. Investigation into the specific components of impairment, such as the processing of feedback in amphetamine and opiate users (Ersche et al. 2005b; Paulus et al. 2002, 2003) would be of great clinical relevance, since it may indicate a need for reconsidering the  
way feedback is provided in clinical settings. Furthermore, understanding the neurobiological substrates underlying cognitive impairment in drug users may have the potential to guide therapeutic intervention in the future. Acknowledgements Karen Ersche holds the Betty Behrens Research Fellowship from Clare Hall College, Cambridge (U.K.). Barbara Sahakian’s research work is funded by the Wellcome Trust and she consults for Cambridge Cognition. The authors would like to thank Dr Samuel Chamberlain for comments on a previous version of the manuscript. References Adinoff, B., Devous, M. D., Cooper, D. B., Best, S. E., Chandler, R, Harris, T., et al. (2003). Resting regional cerebral blood flow and gambling task performance in cocaine-dependent subjects and healthy comparison subjects. American Journal of Psychiatry, 160, 1892-1894. Aharonovich, E., Hasin, D. S., Brooks, A. C., Liu, X., Bisaga, A., & Nunes, E. V. (2006). Cognitive deficits predict low treatment retention in cocaine dependent patients. Drug and Alcohol Dependence, 81, 313—322. Aharonovich, E., Nunes, E., & Hasin, D. (2003). Cognitive impairment, retention and abstinence among cocaine abusers in cognitive-behavioral treatment. Drug and Alcohol Dependence, 71, 207-211. American Psychiatric Association (1994). Diagnostic and statistical manual of mental disorders (4th ed.) Washington, DC: American Psychiatric Association. Amir, T., & Bahri, T. (1994). Effect of substance-abuse on visuographic function. Perceptual and Motor Skills, 78, 235-241. Aron, A. R., Robbins, T. W., & Poldrack, R. A. (2004). Inhibition and the right inferior frontal cortex. Trends in Cognitive Sciences, 8, 170-177. Baddeley, A. (1986). Working memory. Oxford, U.K.: Clarendon. Baicy, K, & London, E. D. (2007). Corticolimbic dysregulation and chronic methamphetamine abuse. Addiction, 102, 5-15. Baker, S. C., Rogers, R. D., Owen, A. M., Frith, C. D., Dolan, R. J., Frackowiak, R. S. J., et al. (1996). Neural systems engaged by planning: A PET study of the Tower of London task. Neuropsychologia, 34, 515—526. Ballon, J. S., & Feifel, D. (2006). A systematic review of modafinil: Potential clinical uses and mechanisms of action. Journal of Clinical Psychiatry, 67, 554—566. Bardo, M. T. (1998). Neuropharmacological mechanisms of drug reward: Beyond dopamine in the nucleus accumbens. Critical Reviews in Neurobiology, 12, 37-67. Bechara, A., Damasio, H., Tranel, D., & Damasio, A. R. (1997). Deciding advantageously before knowing the advantageous strategy. Science, 275, 1293-1295. Bechara, A., Dolan, S., Denburg, N., Hindes, A., Anderson, S. W., & Nathan, P. E. (2001). Decision-making deficits, linked to a dysfunctional ventromedial prefrontal cortex, revealed in alcohol and stimulant abusers. Neuropsychologia, 39, 376-389. Bechara, A., Dolan, S., & Hindes, A. (2002). Decision-making and addiction (part II): Myopia for the future or hypersensitivity to reward? Neuropsychologia, 40, 1690-1705. Bechara, A., & Martin, E. M. (2004). Impaired decision making related to working memory deficits in individuals with substance addictions. Neuropsychology, 18, 152-162. 43 Springer

330 Neuropsychol Rev (2007) 17:317-336

Bell, M. D., Bryson, G. J., Greig, T. C., Fiszdon, J. M., & Wexler, B. E. (2005). Neurocognitive enhancement therapy with work therapy: Productivity outcomes at 6and 12-month follow-ups. Journal of Rehabilitation Research and Development, 42, 829-838. Bench, C. J., Frith, C. D., Grasby, P. M., Friston, K. J., Paulesu, E., Frackowiak, R. S. J., et al. (1993). Investigations ofthe functional anatomy of attention using the Stroop test. Neuropsychologia, 31, 907-922. Birrell, J. M., & Brown, V. J. (2000). Medial frontal cortex mediates perceptual attentional set shifting in the rat. Journal of Neuroscience, 20, 4320—4324. Block, R. I., Bates, M. E., & Hall, J. A. (2003). Relation of premorbid cognitive abilities to substance users’ problems at treatment intake and improvements with substance abuse treatment and case management. American Journal of Drug and Alcohol Abuse, 29, 515-538. Bolla, K. I., Eldreth, D. A., London, E. D., Kiehl, K. A., Mouratidis, M., Contoreggi, C., et al. (2003). Orbitofrontal cortex dysfunction in abstinent cocaine abusers performing a decision-making task. Neuroimage, 19, 1085-1094. Botgaro, S., Pogge, D. L., Deluca, V. A., Bilginer, L., Stokes, J., & Harvey, P. D. (2003). Convergence of different versions of the continuous performance test: Clinical and scientific implications. Journal of Clinical and Experimental Neuropsychology, 25, 283—292. Boys, A., Strang, J., & Homan, C. (1997). Have drug workers in England received appropriate training?: 1995 baseline data from a national survey. Drugs-Education Prevention and Policy, 4, 297-304. Brust, J. C. M. (1998). Acute neurologic complications of drug and alcohol abuse. Neurologic Climes, 16, 503-519. Burgess, P. W. (1997). Theory and methodology in executive function research. In P. Rabbitt (Ed.), Methodology of frontal and executive function. Hove, East Sussex: Psychology. Buttner, A., Mall, G., Penning, R., & Weis, S. (2000). The neuropathology of heroin abuse. Forensic Science International, 113, 435 442. Buxton, N., & McConachie, N. S. (2000). Amphetamine abuse and intracranial haemorrhage. Journal of the Royal Society of Medicine, 93, 472—477. Bymaster, F. P., Katner, J. S., Nelson, D. L., Hemrick-Luecke, S. K., Threlkeld, P. G., Heiligenstein, J. H., et al. (2002). Atomoxetine increases extracellular levels of norepinephrine and dopamine in prefrontal cortex of rat: A potential mechanism for efficacy in Attention Deficil/Hyperactivity Disorder. Neuropsychopharmacology, 27, 699-711. Carter, C. S., Braver, T. S., Barch, D. M., Botvinick, M. M., Noll, D., & Cohen, J. D. (1998). Anterior cingulate cortex, error detection, and the online monitoring of performance. Science, 280, 747-749. Casey, K. L., Svensson, P., Morrow, T. J., Raz, J., Jone, C., & Minoshima, S. (2000). Selective opiate modulation of nociceptive processing in the human brain. Journal of Neurophysiology, 84, 525-533. Chamberlain, S. R., Muller, U., Cleary, S., Robbins, T. W. & Sahakian, B. J. (2007). Atomoxetine increases salivary cortisol in healthy volunteers. Journal of Psychopharmacology (in press). Chamberlain, S. R., & Sahakian, B. J. (2007). The neuropsychiatry of impulsivity. Current Opinion in Psychiatry, 20, 255-261. Chang, L., Cloak, C., Patterson, K., Grob, C., Miller, E. N., & Ernst, T. (2005). Enlarged striatum in abstinent methamphetamine abusers: A possible compensatory response. Biological Psychiatry, 57, 967-974. Chang, L., Ernst, T., Speck, O., Patel, H., DeSilva, M., Leonido-Yee, M., et al. (2002). Perfusion MRI and computerized cognitive test abnormalities in abstinent methamphetamine users. Psychiatry Research: Neuroimaging, 114, 65-79.  
Chikazoe, J., Konishi, S., Asari, T., Jimura, K., & Miyashita, Y. (2007). Activation of right inferior frontal gyrus during response inhibition across response modalities. The Journal of Cognitive Neuroscience, 19, 69—80. Clark, L., & Robbins, T. W. (2002). Decision-making deficits in drug addiction. Trends in Cognitive Sciences, 6, 361-363. Clark, L., Robbins, T. W., Ersche, K. D., & Sahakian, B. J. (2006). Reflection impulsivity in chronic and former substance users. Biological Psychiatry, 60, 512—522. Cools, R. & Robbins, T. W. (2004). Chemistry of the adaptive mind. Philosophical Transactions of the Royal Society of London Series AMathematical Physical and Engineering Sciences, 362, 2871—2888. Curran, H. V.,Kleckham, J., Beam, J., Strang, J., & Wanigaratne, S. (2001). Effects of methadone on cognition, mood and craving in detoxifying opiate addicts: A dose-response study. Psychopharmacology, 154, 153-160. Czuchry, M., & Dansereau, D. F. (2003a). Cognitive skills training: Impact on drug abuse counseling and readiness for treatment. American Journal of Drug and Alcohol Abuse, 29, 1—18. Czuchry, M., & Dansereau, D. F. (2003b). A model ofthe effects of nodelink mapping on drug abuse counseling. Addictive Behaviors, 28, 537-549. Dagher, A., Owen, A. M., Boecker, H., & Brooks, D. J. (2001). The role of the striatum and hippocampus in planning: A PET activation study in Parkinson’s disease. Brain, 124, 1020-1032. Daglish, M. R. C., & Nutt, D. J. (2003). Brain imaging studies in human addicts. European Neuropsychopharmacology, 13, 453^158. Danos, P., Kasper, S., Grunwald, F., Klemm, E., Krappel, C., Broich, K, et al. (1998a). Pathological regional blood flow in opiatedependent patients during withdrawal: A HMPAO-SPECT study. Neuropsychobiology, 37, 194-199. Danos, P., Van Roos, D., Kasper, S., Bromel, T., Broich, K., Krappel, C. et al. (1998b). Enlarged cerebrospinal fluid spaces in opiate-dependent male patients: A stereological CT study. Neuropsychobiology, 38, 80-83. Dansereau, D. F., & Dees, S. M. (2002). Mapping training: The transfer of a cognitive technology for improving counseling. Journal of Substance Abuse Treatment, 22, 219-230. Darke, S., Sims, J., McDonald, S., & Wickes, W. (2000). Cognitive impairment among methadone maintenance patients. Addiction, 95, 687-695. Davis, P. E., Liddiard, H., & McMillan, T. M. (2002). Neuropsychological deficits and opiate abuse. Drug and Alcohol Dependence, 67, 105-108. de Lima, M. S., Soares, G. D., Reisser, A. A. P., & Farrell, M. (2002). Pharmacological treatment of cocaine dependence: A systematic review. Addiction, 97, 931-949. De Vries, T. J., & Shippenbetg, T. S. (2002). Neural systems underlying opiate addiction. Journal of Neuroscience, 22, 3321—3325. Deakin, J. B., Aitken, M. R. F., Robbins, T. W., & Sahakian, B. J. (2004). Risk taking during decision-making in normal volunteers changes with age. Journal of the International Neuroscience Society, 10, 590-598. DeBattista, C., Lembke, A., Solvason, H. B., Ghebremichael, R., & Poirier, J. (2004). A prospective trial of modafinil as an adjunctive treatment of major depression. Journal of Clinical Psychopharmacology, 24, 87—90. Derbyshire, S. W. G., Vogt, B. A., & Jones, A. K. P. (1998). Pain and Stroop interference tasks activate separate processing modules in anterior cingulate cortex. Experimental Brain Research, 118, 52-60. Deroche-Gamonet, V., Damaudery, M., Bruins-Slot, L., Piat, F., Le Moal, M., & Piazza, P. V. (2002). Study of the addictive

Springer

Neuropsychol Rev (2007) 17:317-336 331

potential of modafinil in naive and cocaine-experienced rats. Psychopharmacology, 161, 387—395. Di Chiara, G., & Imperato, A. (1986). Preferential stimulation of dopamine release in the nucleus accumbens by opiates, alcohol, and barbiturates: Studies with transcerebral dialysis in freely moving rats. Annals of the New York Academy of Sciences, 473, 367-381. Dias, R., Robbins, T. W., & Roberts, A. C. (1997). Dissociable forms of inhibitory control within prefrontal cortex with an analog of the Wisconsin Card Sort Test: Restriction to novel situations and independence from “on-line” processing. Journal of Neuroscience, 17, 9285-9297. Dickman, S. J. (1990). Functional and dysfunctional impulsivity—personality and cognitive correlates. Journal of Personality and Social Psychology, 58, 95-102. Dougherty, D. M., Bjork, J. M., Andrew Harper, R., Marsh, D. M., Gerard Moeller, F., Mathias, C. W., et al. (2003). Behavioral impulsivity paradigms: A comparison in hospitalized adolescents with disruptive behavior disorders. Journal of Child Psychology and Psychiatry, 44, 1145-1157. Downes, J. J., Roberts, A. C., Sahakian, B. J., Evenden, J. L., Morris, R. G., & Robbins, T. W. (1989). Impaired extra-dimensional shift performance in medicated and unmedicated Parkinson’s disease: Evidence for a specific attentional dysfunction. Neuropsychologia, 27, 1329-1343. Duka, T., Turner, D. C., & Sahakian, B. J. (2005). Experimental psychology and research into brain science, addiction and drugs. http://www.foresight.gov.uk/Brain_Science_Addiction_and_ Drugs/828_bb.html [On-line]. Dursteler-MacFarland, K. M., Stormer, R., Seifritz, E., Hug, I., Muller-Spahn, F., Ladewig, D. et al. (2000). Opioid-associated effects on oxygen saturation in humans. Addiction, 95, 285-287. Elliott, R. (2003). Executive functions and their disorders. British Medical Bulletin, 65, 49-59. Ernst, M., Grant, S. J., London, E. D., Contoreggi, C. S., Kimes, A. S., & Spurgeon, L. (2003). Decision making in adolescents with behavior disorders and adults with substance abuse. American Journal of Psychiatry, 160, 33—40. Ernst, M., & Paulus, M. P. (2005). Neurobiology of decision making: A selective review from a neurocognitive and clinical perspective. Biological Psychiatry, 58, 596-604. Ersche, K. D., Clark, L., London, M., Robbins, T. W., & Sahakian, B. J. (2006a). Profile of executive and memory function associated with amphetamine and opiate dependence. Neuropsychopharmacology, 31, 1036-1047. Ersche, K. D., Fletcher, P. C., Lewis, S. J. G., Clark, L., Stocks-Gee, G., London, M., et al. (2005a). Abnormal frontal activations related to decision-making in current and former amphetamine and opiate dependent individuals. Psychopharmacology, 180, 612—623. Ersche, K. D., Fletcher, P. C., Roiser, J. P., Fryer, T. D., London, M., Robbins, T. W., et al. (2006b). Differences in orbitofrontal activation during decision-making between methadone-maintained opiate users, heroin users and healthy volunteers. Psychopharmacology, 188, 364-373. Ersche, K. D., Roiser, J. P., Clark, L., London, M., Robbins, T. W., & Sahakian, B. J. (2005b). Punishment induces risky decisionmaking in methadone-maintained opiate users but not in heroin users or healthy volunteers. Neuropsychopharmacology, 30, 2115-2124. Eslinger, P. J., & Grattan, L. M. (1993). Frontal lobe and frontalstriatal substrates for different forms of human cognitive flexibility. Neuropsychologia, 31, 17-28. Evenden, J. L. (1999). Varieties of impulsivity. Psychopharmacology, 146, 348-361.  
FalsStewart, W. (1997). Ability of counselors to detect cognitive impairment among substance-abusing patients: An examination of diagnostic efficiency. Experimental and Clinical Psychopharmacology, 5, 39-50. FalsStewart, W., & Lucente, S. (1994a). Effect of neurocognitive status and personality functioning on length of stay in residential substance-abuse treatment—an integrative study. Psychology of Addictive Behaviors, 8, 179-190. FalsStewart, W., & Lucente, S. (1994b). The effect of cognitive rehabilitation on the neuropsychological status of patients in drug-abuse treatment who display neurocognitive impairment. Rehabilitation Psychology, 39, 75-94. FalsStewart, W., & Schafer, J. (1992). The relationship between length of stay in drug-free therapeutic communities and neurocognitive functioning. Journal of Clinical Psychology, 48, 539-543. Ferraro, L., Antonelli, T., Tanganelli, S., O’Connor, W. T., de la Mora, M. P., Mendez-Franco, J., et al. (1999). The vigilance promoting drug modafinil increases extracellular glutamate levels in the medial preoptic area and the posterior hypothalamus of the conscious rat: Prevention by local GABA(A) receptor blockade. Neuropsychopharmacology, 20, 346—356. Fillmore, M. T., & Rush, C. R. (2002). Impaired inhibitory control of behavior in chronic cocaine users. Drug and Alcohol Dependence, 66, 265-273. Fishbain, D. A., Cutler, R. B., Rosomoff, H. L., & Rosomoff, R. S. (2003). Are opioid-dependent/tolerant patients impaired in driving-related skills? A structured evidence-based review. Journal of Pain and Symptom Management, 25, 559—577. Fishbein, D., Hyde, C., Eldreth, D., London, E. D., Matochik, J., Ernst, M., et al. (2005). Cognitive performance and autonomic reactivity in abstinent drug abusers and nonusers. Experimental and Clinical Psychopharmacology, 13, 25—40. Fishbein, D. H., Krupitsky, E., Flannery, B. A., Langevin, D. J., Bobashev, G., Verbitskaya, E., et al. (2007). Neurocognitive characterizations of Russian heroin addicts without a significant history of other drug use. Drug and Alcohol Dependence, 90, 25-38. Forman, S. D., Dougherty, G. G., Casey, B. J., Siegle, G. J., Braver, T. S., Batch, D. M., et al. (2004). Opiate addicts lack error-dependent activation of rostral anterior cingulate. Biological Psychiatry, 55, 531-537. Gabilondo, A. M., Meana, J. J., Barturen, F., Sastre, M., & Garciasevilla, J. A. (1994). Mu-opioid receptor and alpha(2)- adrenoceptor agonist binding-sites in the postmortem brain of heroin-addicts. Psychopharmacology, 115, 135-140. Galynker, I. I., Watras-Ganz, S., Miner, C., Rosenthal, R. N., Jarlais, D. C. D., Richman, B. L., et al. (2000). Cerebral metabolism in opiate-dependent subjects: Effects of methadone maintenance. Mount Sinai Journal of Medicine, 67, 381-387. Gastfriend, D. R., & McLellan, A. T. (1997). Treatment matching—Theoretic basis and practical implications. Medical Clinics of North America, 81, 945—966. Gehring, W. J., & Knight, R. T. (2000). Prefrontal-cingulate interactions in action monitoring. Nature Neuroscience, 3, 516-520. Gerra, G., Calbiani, B., Zaimovic, A., Sartori, R., Ugolotti, G., Ippolito, L., et al. (1998). Regional cerebral blood flow and comorbid diagnosis in abstinent opioid addicts. Psychiatry Research-Neuroimaging, 83, 117—126. Goldstein, R. Z., & Volkow, N. D. (2002). Drug addiction and its underlying neurobiological basis: Neuroimaging evidence for the involvement of the frontal cortex. American Journal of Psychiatry, 159, 1642-1652. Gonzalez, R., Rippeth, J. D., Carey, C. L., Heaton, R. K., Moore, D. J., Schweinsburg, B. C., et al. (2004). Neurocognitive performance of 41] Springer

332 Neuropsychol Rev (2007) 17:317-336

methamphetamine users discordant for history of marijuana exposure. Drug and Alcohol Dependence, 76, 181-190. Grant, D. A., & Berg, E. A. (1948). A behavioral analysis of degree of reinforcement and ease of shifting to new responses in a Weigltype card-sorting problem. Journal of Experimental Psychology, 38, 404-411. Grant, S., Contoreggi, C., & London, E. D. (2000). Drug abusers show impaired performance in a laboratory test of decision making. Neuropsychologia, 38, 1180-1187. Gruber, S. A., Silveri, M. M., Renshaw, P. F., Tzilos, G. K, Pollack, M., Kaufman, M. J., et al. (2006). Methadone maintenance improves cognitive performance after two months of treatment. Experimental and Clinical Psychopharmacology, 14, 157-164. Guerra, D., Sole, A., Cami, J., & Tobena, A. (1987). Neuropsychological performance in opiate addicts after rapid detoxification. Drug and Alcohol Dependence, 20, 261-270. Haselhorst, R., Dursteler-MacFarland, K. M., Scheffler, K., Ladewig, D., Muller-Spahn, F., Stohler, R., et al. (2002). Frontocortical Nacetylaspartate reduction associated with long-term IV heroin use. Neurology, 58, 305-307. Hastie, R. (2001). Problems for judgment and decision making. Annual Review of Psychology, 52, 653—683. Hester, R., & Garavan, H. (2004). Executive dysfunction in cocaine addiction: Evidence for discordant frontal, cingulate, and cerebellar activity. Journal of Neuroscience, 24, 11017-11022. Hester, R., Simoes-Franklin, C., & Garavan, H. (2007). Post-error behavior in active cocaine users: Poor awareness of errors in the presence of intact performance adjustments. Neuropsychopharmacology (in press). Hoffman, W. F., Moore, M., Templin, R., McFarland, B., Hitzemann, R. J., & Mitchell, S. H. (2006). Neuropsychological function and delay discounting in methamphetamine-dependent individuals. Psychopharmacology, 188, 162-170. Hogarty, G. E., Flesher, S., Ulrich, R., Carter, M., Greenwald, D., Pogue-Geile, M., et al. (2004). Cognitive enhancement therapy for schizophrenia: Effects of a 2-year randomized trial on cognition and behavior. Archives of General Psychiatry, 61, 866-876. Hom, N. R., Dolan, M., Elliott, R., Deakin, J. F. W., & Woodruff, P. W. R. (2003). Response inhibition and impulsivity: An fMRI study. Neuropsychologia, 41, 1959-1966. Hwang, J., Lyoo, I. K, Kim, S. I, Sung, Y. H., Bae, S., Cho, S. N., et al. (2006). Decreased cerebral blood flow of the right anterior cingulate cortex in long-term and short-term abstinent methamphetamine users. Drug and Alcohol Dependence, 82, 177-181. Jaffe, A. J., Rounsaville, B., Chang, G., Schottenfeld, R. S., Meyer, R. E., & OMalley, S. S. (1996). Naltrexone, relapse prevention, and supportive therapy with alcoholics: An analysis of patient treatment matching. Journal of Consulting and Clinical Psychology, 64, 1044-1053. Jentsch, J. D., & Taylor, J. R. (1999). Impulsivity resulting from frontostriatal dysfunction in drug abuse: Implications for the control of behavior by reward-related stimuli. Psychopharmacology, 146, 373-390. Jemigan, T. L., Gamst, A. C., Archibald, S. L., Fennema-Notestine, C., Mindt, M. R., Marcotte, T. L., et al. (2005). Effects of methamphetamine dependence and HIV infection on cerebral morphology. American Journal of Psychiatry, 162, 1461-1472. Johanson, C. E., Frey, K. A., Lundahl, L. H., Keenan, P., Lockhart, N., Roll, J., et al. (2006). Cognitive function and nigrostriatal markers in abstinent methamphetamine abusers. Psychopharmacology, 185, 327-338. Jollant, F., Bellivier, F., Leboyer, M., Astruc, B., Torres, S., Verdier, R., et al. (2005). Impaired decision making in suicide attempters. American Journal of Psychiatry, 162, 304—310.  
Jollant, F., Guillaume, S., Jaussent, I., Castelnau, D., Malafosse, A., & Courtet, P. (2007). Impaired decision-making in suicide attempters may increase the risk of problems in affective relationships. Journal of Affective Disorders, 99, 59—62. Kalechstein, A. D., Newton, T. F., & Green, M. (2003). Methamphetamine dependence is associated with neurocognitive impairment in the initial phases of abstinence. Journal of Neuropsychiatry, 15, 215-220. Katz, E. C., King, S. D., Schwartz, R. P., Weintraub, E., Barksdale, W., Robinson, R., et al. (2005). Cognitive ability as a factor in engagement in drug abuse treatment. American Journal of Drug and Alcohol Abuse, 31, 359-369. Kaufman, J. N., Ross, T. J., Stein, E. A., & Garavan, H. (2003). Cingulate hypoactivity in cocaine users during a GO-NOGO task as revealed by event-related functional magnetic resonance imaging. Journal of Neuroscience, 23, 7839-7843. Kerwin, M. E., Walker-Smith, K, & Kirby, K. C. (2006). Comparative analysis of state requirements for the training of substance abuse and mental health counselors. Journal of Substance Abuse Treatment, 30, 173-181. Kim, S. J., Lyoo, I. K, Hwang, J., Chung, A., Sung, Y. H., Kim, J., et al. (2006). Prefrontal grey-matter changes in short-term and long-term abstinent methamphetamine abusers. International Journal of Neuropsychopharmacology, 9, 221—228. Kim, S. J., Lyoo, I. K., Hwang, J., Sung, Y. H., Lee, H. Y., Lee, D. S., et al. (2005a). Frontal glucose hypometabolism in abstinent methamphetamine users. Neuropsychopharmacology, 30, 1383-1391. Kim, S. J., Lyoo, I. K, Hwang, J., Sung, Y. H., Lee, H. Y., Lee, D. S. et al. (2005b). Frontal glucose hypometabolism in abstinent methamphetamine users. Neuropsychopharmacology, 30, 1383-1391. Kish, S. J., Kalasinsky, K. S., Derkach, P., Schmunk, G. A., Guttman, M., Ang, L., et al. (2001). Striatal dopaminetgic and serotoneigic markers in human heroin users. Neuropsychopharmacology, 24, 561-567. Kling, M. A., Carson, R. E., Borg, L., Zametkin, A., Matochik, J. A., Schluger, J., et al. (2000). Opioid receptor imaging with positron emission tomography and [F-18]cyclofoxy in long-term, methadone-treated former heroin addicts. Journal of Pharmacology and Experimental Therapeutics, 295, 1070-1076. Konishi, S., Nakajima, K., Uchida, I., Kameyama, M., Nakahara, K., Sekihara, K., et al. (1998a). Transient activation of inferior prefrontal cortex during cognitive set shifting. Nature Neuroscience, 1, 80-84. Konishi, S., Nakajima, K., Uchida, I., Kameyama, M., Nakahara, K., Sekihara, K, et al. (1998b). Transient activation of inferior prefrontal cortex during cognitive set shifting. Nature Neuroscience, 1, 80-84. Kosten, T. R., Scanley, B. E., Tucker, K. A., Oliveto, A., Prince, C., Sinha, R., et al. (2006). Cue-induced brain activity changes and relapse in cocaine-dependent patients. Neuropsychopharmacology, 31, 644-650. Kumar, N. (2007). Nutritional neuropathies. Neurologic Clinics, 25, 209-255. Lee, T. M. C., Zhou, W. h., Luo, X. j., Yuen, K. S. L., Ruan, X. z., & Weng, X. c. (2005). Neural activity associated with cognitive regulation in heroin users: A fMRI study. Neuroscience Letters, 382, 211-216. Leland, D. S., & Paulus, M. P. (2005). Increased risk-taking decisionmaking but not altered response to punishment in stimulant-using young adults. Drug and Alcohol Dependence, 78, 83-90. Leung, H. C., Skudlarski, P., Gatenby, J. C., Peterson, B. S., & Gore, J. C. (2000). An event-related functional MRI study of the Stroop color word interference task. Cerebral Cortex, 10, 552-560.

Springer

Neuropsychol Rev (2007) 17:317-336 333

Levine, A. J., Hardy, D. J., Miller, E., Castellon, S. A., Longshore, D., & Hinkin, C. H. (2006). The effect of recent stimulant use on sustained attention in HIV-Infected adults. Journal of Clinical and Experimental Neuropsychology, 28, 29—42. London, E. D., Berman, S. M., Voytek, B., Simon, S. L., Mandelkem, M. A., Monterosso, J., et al. (2005). Cerebral metabolic dysfunction and impaired vigilance in recently abstinent methamphetamine abusers. Biological Psychiatry, 58, 770-778. London, E. D., Ernst, M., Grant, S., Bonson, K., & Weinstein, A. (2000). Orbitofrontal cortex and human drug abuse: Functional imaging. Cerebral Cortex, 10, 334-342. London, E. D., Simon, S. L., Berman, S. M., Mandelkem, M. A., Lichtman, A. M., Bremen, J., et al. (2004). Mood disturbances and regional cerebral metabolic abnormalities in recently abstinent methamphetamine abusers. Archives of General Psychiatry, 61, 73-84. Lyoo, I. K., Pollack, M. H., Silveri, M. M., Ahn, K. H., Diaz, C. I., Hwang, J., et al. (2006). Prefrontal and temporal gray matter density decreases in opiate dependence. Psychopharmacology, 184, 139-144. Lyvers, M. & Yakimoff, M. (2003). Neuropsychological correlates of opioid dependence and withdrawal. Addictive Behaviors, 28, 605-611. Mackin, R. S., Homer, M. D., Harvey, R. T., & Stevens, L. A. (2005). The relationship between neuropsychological measures and employment problems in outpatients with substance abuse. Rehabilitation Psychology, 50, 158-163. Malcolm, R., Book, S. W., Moak, D., DeVane, L., & Czepowicz, V. (2002). Clinical applications of modafinil in stimulant abusers: Low abuse potential. American Journal on Addictions, 11, 247-249. Maldonado, R. (1997). Participation of noradrenergic pathways in the expression of opiate withdrawal: Biochemical and pharmacological evidence. Neuroscience & Biobehavioral Reviews, 21, 91-104. Manes, F., Sahakian, B. J., Clark, L., Rogers, R. D., Antoun, N., Aitken, M., et al. (2002). Decision-making processes following damage to the prefrontal cortex. Brain, 125, 624—639. Mathew, R. J., & Wilson, W. H. (1991). Substance-Abuse and Cerebral Blood-Flow. American Journal of Psychiatry, 148, 292-305. McCann, U. D., Wong, D. F., Yokoi, F., Villemagne, V., Dannals, R. F., & Ricaurte, G. A. (1998). Reduced striatal dopamine transporter density in abstinent methamphetamine and methcathinone users: Evidence from positron emission tomography studies with [C-ll]WIN-35,428. Journal of Neuroscience, 18, 84178422. McKetin, R., & Mattick, R. P. (1998). Attention and memory in illicit amphetamine users: Comparison with non-drug-using controls. Drug and Alcohol Dependence, 50, 181-184. McLellan, A. T., Grissom, G. R., Zanis, D., Randall, M., Brill, P., & O’Brien, C. P. (1997). Problem-service ‘matching’ in addiction treatment. A prospective study in 4 programs. Archives of General Psychiatry, 54, 730-735. Mehta, M. A., Manes, F. F., Magnolfi, G., Sahakian, B. J., & Robbins, T. W. (2004). Impaired set-shifting and dissociable effects on tests of spatial working memory following the dopamine D-2 receptor antagonist sulpiride in human volunteers. Psychopharmacology, 176, 331-342. Mehta, M. A., Sahakian, B. J., McKenna, P. J., & Robbins, T. W. (1999). Systemic sulpiride in young adult volunteers simulates the profile of cognitive deficits in Parkinson’s disease. Psychopharmacology, 146, 162—174. Melichar, J. K., Hume, S. P., Williams, T. M., Daglish, M. R. C., Taylor, L. G., Ahmad, R., et al. (2005). Using [C-ll]diprenor-  
phine to image opioid receptor occupancy by methadone in opioid addiction: Clinical and preclinical studies. Journal of Pharmacology and Experimental Therapeutics, 312, 309-315. Metiers, B. A., Schwartz, A., & Cooke, A. D. J. (1998). Judgment and decision making. Annual Review of Psychology, 49, 447-477. Michelson, D., Faries, D., Wernicke, J., Kelsey, D., Kendrick, K., Sallee, F. R., et al. (2001). Atomoxetine in the treatment of children and adolescents with attention-deficit/hyperactivity disorder: A randomized, placebo-controlled, dose-response study. Pediatrics, 108, e83. Mintzer, M. Z., Copersino, M. L., & Stitzer, M. L. (2005). Opioid abuse and cognitive performance. Drug and. Alcohol Dependence, 78, 225-230. Mintzer, M. Z., & Stitzer, M. L. (2002). Cognitive impairment in methadone maintenance patients. Drug and Alcohol Dependence, 67, 41-51. Mitchell, D. G. V., Colledge, E., Leonard, A., & Blair, R. J. R. (2002). Risky decisions and response reversal: Is there evidence of orbitofrontal cortex dysfunction in psychopathic individuals? Neuropsychologia, 40, 2013—2022. Monterosso, J. R., Aron, A. R., Cordova, X., Xu, J., & London, E. D. (2005). Deficits in response inhibition associated with chronic methamphetamine abuse. Drug and Alcohol Dependence, 79, 273-277. Monterosso, J., Ehrman, R., Napier, K. L., O’Brien, C. P., & Childress, A. R. (2001). Three decision-making tasks in cocaine-dependent patients: Do they measure the same construct? Addiction, 96, 1825—1837. Moon, M., Do, K. S., Park, J., & Kim, D. (2007). Memory impairment in methamphetamine dependent patients. International Journal of Neuroscience, 117, 1-9. Morgenstern, J., & Bates, M. E. (1999). Effects of executive function impairment on change processes and substance use outcomes in 12-step treatment. Journal of Studies on Alcohol, 60, 846-855. Nagahama, Y., Okada, T., Katsumi, Y., Hayashi, T., Yamauchi, H., Oyanagi, C., et al. (2001). Dissociable mechanisms of attentional control within the human prefrontal cortex. Cerebral Cortex, 11, 85-92. Neaigus, A., Gyarmathy, V. A., Zhao, M. F., Miller, M., Friedman, S. R., & Des Jarlais, D. C. (2007). Sexual and other noninjection risks for HBV and HCV seroconversions among noninjecting heroin users. Journal of Infectious Diseases, 195, 1052-1061. Neiman, J., Haapaniemi, H. M., & Hillbom, M. (2000). Neurological complications of drug abuse: Pathophysiological mechanisms. European Journal of Neurology, 7, 595—606. Nieoullon, A. (2002). Dopamine and the regulation of cognition and attention. Progress in Neurobiology, 67, 53—83. Nordahl, T. E., Salo, R., Natsuaki, Y., Galloway, G. P., Waters, C., Moore, C. D., et al. (2005). Methamphetamine users in sustained abstinence: A proton magnetic resonance spectroscopy study. Archives of General Psychiatry, 62, 444—452. Nordahl, T. E., Salo, R., Possin, K., Gibson, D. R., Flynn, N., Leamon, M., et al. (2002). Low :V-acetyl-aspartate and high choline in the anterior cingulum of recently abstinent methamphetamine-dependent subjects: A preliminary proton MRS study. Psychiatry Research: Neuroimaging, 116, 43-52. O’Brien, C. P., Dackis, C. A., & Kampman, K. (2006). Does modafinil produce euphoria? American Journal of Psychiatry, 163, 1109. Oh, J. S., Lyoo, I. K, Sung, Y. H., Hwang, J., Kim, J., Chung, A., et al. (2005). Shape changes of the corpus callosum in abstinent methamphetamine users. Neuroscience Letters, 384, 76-81. Omstein, T. J., Iddon, J. L., Baldacchino, A. M., Sahakian, B. J., London, M., Everitt, B. J., et al. (2000). Profiles of cognitive Springer

334 Neuropsychol Rev (2007) 17:317-336

dysfunction in chronic amphetamine and heroin abusers. Neuropsychopharmacology, 23, 113-126. Owen, A. M. (1997). Cognitive planning in humans: Neuropsychological, neuroanatomical and neuropharmacological perspectives. Progress in Neurobiology, 53, 431 450. Owen, A. M., Downes, J. J., Sahakian, B. J., Polkey, C. E., & Robbins, T. W. (1990). Planning and spatial working memory following frontal-lobe lesions in man. Neuropsychologia, 28, 1021-1034. Owen, A. M., Sahakian, B. J., Semple, J., Polkey, C. E., & Robbins, T. W. (1995). Visuo-spatial short-term recognition memory and learning after temporal lobe excisions, frontal lobe excisions or amygdalo-hippocampectomy in man. Neuropsychologia, 33, 124. Papageorgiou, C. C., Liappas, I. A., Ventouras, E. M., Nikolaou, C. C., Kitsonas, E. N., Uzunoglu, N. K, et al. (2004). Long-term abstinence syndrome in heroin addicts: Indices of P300 alterations associated with a short memory task. Progress in NeuroPsychopharmacology and Biological Psychiatry, 28, 1109-1115. Pardo, J. V., Pardo, P. J., Janer, K. W., & Raichle, M. E. (1990). The anterior cingulate cortex mediates processing selection in the Stroop attentional conflict paradigm. Proceedings of the National Academy of Sciences, 87, 256-259. Patton, J. H., Stanford, M. S., & Barratt, E. S. (1995). Factor structure of the Barratt impulsiveness scale. Journal of Clinical Psychology, 51, 768-774. Pau, C. W. H., Lee, T. M. C., & Chan, S. F. F. (2002). The impact of heroin on frontal executive functions. Archives of Clinical Neuropsychology, 17, 663—670. Paulus, M. P., Hozack, N., Frank, L., Brown, G. G., & Schuckit, M. A. (2003). Decision making by methamphetamine-dependent subjects is associated with error-rate-independent decrease in prefrontal and parietal activation. Biological Psychiatry, 53, 65-74. Paulus, M. P., Hozack, N. E., Zauscher, B. E., Frank, L., Brown, G. G., Braff, D. L., et al. (2002). Behavioral and functional neuroimaging evidence for prefrontal dysfunction in methamphetamine-dependent subjects. Neuropsychopharmacology, 26, 53-63. Paulus, M. P., Tapert, S. F., & Schuckit, M. A. (2005). Neural activation patterns of methamphetamine-dependent subjects during decision making predict relapse. Archives of General Psychiatry, 62, 761—768. Petrovic, P., Kalso, E., Petersson, K. M., & Ingvar, M. (2002). Placebo and opioid analgesia—imaging a shared neuronal network. Science, 295, 1737-1740. Pezawas, L. M., Fischer, G., Diamant, K., Schneider, C., Schindler, S. D., Thumher, M., et al. (1998). Cerebral CT findings in male opioiddependent patients: Stereological, planimetric and linear measurements. Psychiatry Research-Neuroimaging, 83, 139—147. Pirastu, R., Fais, R., Messina, M., Bini, V., Spiga, S., Falconieri, D., et al. (2006). Impaired decision-making in opiate-dependent subjects: Effect of pharmacological therapies. Drug and Alcohol Dependence, 83, 163-168. Pitre, U., Dansereau, D. F., & Joe, G. W. (1996). Client education levels and the effectiveness of node-link maps. Journal of Addictive Diseases, 15, 27—44. Poulsen, E. J., Mannis, M. J., & Chang, S. D. (1996). Keratitis in methamphetamine abusers. Cornea, 15, 477-482. Prosser, J., Cohen, L. J., Steinfeld, M., Eisenberg, D., London, E. D., & Galynker, I. I. (2006). Neuropsychological functioning in opiate-dependent subjects receiving and following methadone maintenance treatment. Drug and Alcohol Dependence, 84, 240-247. Rapeli, P., Kivisaari, R., Autti, T., Kahkonen, S., Puuskari, V., Jokela, O., et al. (2006). Cognitive function during early abstinence from opioid  
dependence: A comparison to age, gender, and verbal intelligence matched controls. BMC Psychiatry, 6, 9. Rippeth, J. D., Heaton, R. K, Carey, C. L., Marcotte, T. D., Moore, D. J., Gonzalez, R., et al. (2004). Methamphetamine dependence increases risk of neuropsychological impairment in HIV infected persons. Journal of the International Neuropsychological Society, 10, 1-14. Robbins, T. W. (1996). Dissociating executive functions of the prefrontal cortex. Philosophical Transactions of the Royal Society of London Series B-Biological Sciences, 351, 1463-1470. Robbins, T. W. (2005). Chemistry of the mind: Neurochemical modulation of prefrontal cortical function. Journal of Comparative Neurology, 493, 140-146. Robbins, T. W., James, M., Owen, A. M., Sahakian, B. J., Lawrence, A. D., Mcinnes, L., et al. (1998). A study of performance on tests from the CANTAB battery sensitive to frontal lobe dysfunction in a large sample of normal volunteers: Implications for theories of executive functioning and cognitive aging. Journal of the International Neuropsychological Society, 4, 474—490. Robbins, T. W., James, M., Owen, A. M., Sahakian, B. J., Mcinnes, L., & Rabbitt, P. (1994). Cambridge neuropsychological test automated battery (Cantab)—a factor-analytic study of a large-sample of normal elderly volunteers. Dementia, 5, 266-281. Rogers, R. D., Andrews, T. C., Grasby, P. M., Brooks, D. J., & Robbins, T. W. (2000a). Contrasting cortical and subcortical activations produced by attentional-set shifting and reversal learning in humans. Journal of Cognitive Neuroscience, 12, 142-162. Rogers, R. D., Andrews, T. C., Grasby, P. M., Brooks, D. J., & Robbins, T. W. (2000b). Contrasting cortical and subcortical activations produced by attentional-set shifting and reversal learning in humans. Journal of Cognitive Neuroscience, 12, 142-162. Rogers, R. D., Everitt, B. J., Baldacchino, A., Blackshaw, A. J., Swainson, R., Wynne, K., et al. (1999a). Dissociable deficits in the decision-making cognition of chronic amphetamine abusers, opiate abusers, patients with focal damage to prefrontal cortex, and tryptophan-depleted normal volunteers: Evidence for monoaminergic mechanisms. Neuropsychopharmacology, 20, 322339. Rogers, R. D., Owen, A. M., Middleton, H. C., Williams, E. J., Pickard, J. D., Sahakian, B. J., et al. (1999b). Choosing between small, likely rewards and large, unlikely rewards activates inferior and orbital prefrontal cortex. Journal of Neuroscience, 19, 9029-9038. Rogers, R. D. & Robbins, T. W. (2001). Investigating the neurocognitive deficits associated with chronic drug misuse. Current Opinion in Neurobiology, 11, 250-257. Rogers, R. D., & Robbins, T. W. (2003). The neuropsychology of chronic drug abuse. In M. A. Ron & T. W. Robbins (Eds.), Disorders of brain and mind. Cambridge: Cambridge University Press. Rose, J. S., Branchey, M., BuydensBranchey, L., Stapleton, J. M., Chasten, K., Werrell, A., et al. (1996). Cerebral perfusion in early and late opiate withdrawal: A technetium-99m-HMPAO SPECT study. Psychiatry Research-Neuroimaging, 67, 39—47. Rotheram-Fuller, E., Shoptaw, S., Berman, S. M., & London, E. D. (2004). Impaired performance in a test of decision-making by opiate-dependent tobacco smokers. Drug and Alcohol Dependence, 73, 79-86. Rounsaville, B. J., Jones, C., Novelly, R. A., & Kleber, H. (1982). Neuropsychological functioning in opiate addicts. Journal of Nervous and Mental Disease, 170, 209-216. Rubia, K., Smith, A. B., Brammer, M. J., & Taylor, E. (2003). Right inferior prefrontal cortex mediates response inhibition while mesial prefrontal cortex is responsible for error detection. Neuroimage, 20, 351—358.

Springer

Neuropsychol Rev (2007) 17:317-336 335

Russo, K. E., Hall, W., Chi, O. Z., Sinha, A. K, & Weiss, H. R. (1991). Effect of amphetamine on cerebral blood flow and capillary perfusion. Brain Research, 542, 43-48. Rychtarik, R. G., Connors, G. J., Whitney, R. B., McGillicuddy, N. B., Fitterling, J. M., & Wirtz, P. W. (2000). Treatment settings for persons with alcoholism: Evidence for matching clients to inpatient versus outpatient care. Journal of Consulting and Clinical Psychology, 68, 277—289. Sacerdote, P. (2006). Opioids and the immune system. Palliative Medicine, 20, S9-S15. Salo, R., Nordahl, T. E., Moore, C., Waters, C., Natsuaki, Y., Galloway, G. P., et al. (2005). A dissociation in attentional control: Evidence from methamphetamine dependence. Biological Psychiatry, 57, 310-313. Salo, R., Nordahl, T. E., Natsuaki, Y., Leamon, M. H., Galloway, G. P., Waters, C., et al. (2007). Attentional control and brain metabolite levels in methamphetamine abusers. Biological Psychiatry, 61, 1272-1280. Salo, R., Nordahl, T. E., Possin, K, Leamon, M., Gibson, D. R., Galloway, G. P., et al. (2002). Preliminary evidence of reduced cognitive inhibition in methamphetamine-dependent individuals. Psychiatry Research, 111, 65—74. Sarajuuri, J. M., Kaipio, M. L., Koskinen, S. K., Niemela, M. R., Servo, A. R., & Vilkki, J. S. (2005). Outcome of a comprehensive neurorehabilitation program for patients with traumatic brain injury. Archives of Physical Medicine and Rehabilitation, 86, 2296-2302. Sarter, M., Givens, B., & Bruno, J. P. (2001). The cognitive neuroscience of sustained attention: Where top-down meets bottom-up. Brain Research Reviews, 35, 146-160. Seiden, L. S., Sabol, K. E., & Ricaurte, G. A. (1993). Amphetamine: Effects on catecholamine systems and behavior. Annual Review of Pharmacology and Toxicology, 33, 639-676. Sekine, Y., Iyo, M., Ouchi, Y., Matsunaga, T., Tsukada, H., Okada, H. et al. (2001). Methamphetamine-related psychiatric symptoms and reduced brain dopamine transporters studied with PET. American Journal of Psychiatry, 158, 1206—1214. Shallice, T. (1982). Specific impairments of planning. Philosophical Transactions of the Royal Society of London Series B-Biological Sciences, 298, 199-209. Shearer, J. (2007). Psychosocial approaches to psychostimulant dependence: A systematic review. Journal of Substance Abuse Treatment, 32, 41-52. Simon, S. L., Dornier, C., Camell, J., Brethen, P., Rawson, R., & Ling, W. (2000). Cognitive impairment in individuals currently using methamphetamine. American Journal on Addictions, 9, 222-231. Simon, S. L., Dornier, C. P., Sim, T., Richardson, K., Rawson, R. A., & Ling, W. (2002). Cognitive performance of current methamphetamine and cocaine abusers. Journal of Addictive Diseases, 21, 61-74. Spence, S. A., Green, R. D., Wilkinson, I. D., & Hunter, M. D. (2005). Modafinil modulates anterior cingulate function in chronic schizophrenia. British Journal of Psychiatry, 187, 55-61. Stem, R. A., Singer, E. A., Duke, L. M., Singer, N. G., Morey, C. E., Daughtrey, E. W., et al. (1994). The Boston qualitative scoring system for the Rey-Osterrieth complex figure-description and interrater reliability. Clinical Neuropsychologist, 8, 309-322. Stout, J. C., Rock, S. L., Campbell, M. C., Busemeyer, J. R., & Finn, P. R. (2005). Psychological processes underlying risky decisions in drag abusers. Addictive Behaviors, 19, 148-157. Stout, P. R., & Farrell, L. J. (2003). Opioids—effects on human performance and behavior. Forensic Science Review, 15, 30-59. Stroop, J. R. (1992). Studies of Interference in Serial Verbal Reactions (Reprinted from Journal Experimental-Psychology, Vol 18, Pg 643-662, 1935). Journal of Experimental Psychology-General, 121, 15-23.  
Sung, Y. H., Cho, S. C., Hwang, J., Kim, S. J., Kim, H., Bae, S. et al. (2007). Relationship between ,V-acetyl-aspartate in gray and white matter of abstinent methamphetamine abusers and their history of drug abuse: A proton magnetic resonance spectroscopy study. Drug and Alcohol Dependence, 88, 28-35. Taneja, I., Haman, K., Shelton, R. C., & Robertson, D. (2007). A randomized, double-blind, crossover trial of modafinil on mood. Journal of Clinical Psychopharmacology, 27, 76—79. Tapert, S. F., Brown, S. A., Myers, M. G., & Granholm, E. (1999). The role of neurocognitive abilities in coping with adolescent relapse to alcohol and drug use. Journal of Studies on Alcohol, 60, 500-508. Tapert, S. F., Ozyurt, S. S., Myers, M. G., & Brown, S. A. (2004). Neurocognitive ability in adults coping with alcohol and drug relapse temptations. American Journal of Drug and Alcohol Abuse, 30, 445 A60. Taylor, M. J., Letendre, S. L., Schweinsbutg, B. C., Alhassoon, O. M., Brown, G. G., Gongvatana, A., et al. (2004). Hepatitis C vims infection is associated with reduced white matter ,V-acetylaspartate in abstinent methamphetamine users. Journal of the International Neuropsychological Society, 10, 110-113. Teichner, G., Homer, M. D., Roitzsch, J. C., Herron, J., & Thevos, A. (2002). Substance abuse treatment outcomes for cognitively impaired and intact outpatients. Addictive Behaviors, 27, 751—763. Thompson, P. M., Hayashi, K. M., Simon, S. L., Geaga, J. A., Hong, M. S., Sui, Y. H., et al. (2004). Structural abnormalities in the brains of human subjects who use methamphetamine. Journal of Neuroscience, 24, 6028-6036. Toomey, R., Lyons, M. J., Eisen, S. A., Xian, H., Chantarujikapong, S., Seidman, L. J., et al. (2003). A twin study of the neuropsychological consequences of stimulant abuse. Archives of General Psychiatry, 60, 303-310. Tsai, G., & Coyle, J. T. (1995). ,V-Acetylaspartate in neuropsychiatric disorders. Progress in Neurobiology, 46, 531—540. Turner, D. C., Clark, L., Dowson, J., Robbins, T. W., & Sahakian, B. J. (2004a). Modafinil improves cognition and response inhibition in adult attention-deficil/hyperactivity disorder. Biological Psychiatry, 55, 1031-1040. Turner, D. C., Clark, L., Pomarol-Clotet, E., McKenna, P., Robbins, T. W., & Sahakian, B. J. (2004b). Modafinil improves cognition and attentional set shifting in patients with chronic schizophrenia. Neuropsychopharmacology, 29, 1363-1373. U.K. Department of Health (1999). Drug misuse and dependence—guidelines on clinical management. Norwich, U.K.: The Stationery Office Ltd. United Nations Office on Drugs and Crime (2003a). Global illicit drug trends 2003. New York, NY: United Nations Office on Dmgs and Crime (UNODC). United Nations Office on Dmgs and Crime (2003b). World Drug Report 2004. (vols. 1: Analysis). Vienna, AU: United Nations Office on Dmgs and Crime (UNODC). Urbina, A. & Jones, K. (2004). Crystal methamphetamine, its analogues, and HIV infection: Medical and psychiatric aspects of a new epidemic. Clinical Infectious Diseases, 38, 890-894. van Honk, J., Hermans, E. J., Putman, P., Montague, B., & Schutter, D. J. L. G. (2002). Defective somatic markers in sub-clinical psychopathy. Neuroreport, 13, 1025-1027. van Honk, J., Schutter, D. J. L. G., Hermans, E. J., & Putman, P. (2003). Low cortisol levels and the balance between punishment sensitivity and reward dependency. Neuroreport, 14, 1993-1996. Varner, K. J., Ogden, B. A., Delcarpio, J., & Meleg-Smith, S. (2002). Cardiovascular Responses Elicited by the "Binge" Administration of Methamphetamine. Journal of Pharmacology and Experimental Therapeutics, 301, 152-159. Vassileva, J., Petkova, P., Georgiev, S., Martin, E. M., Tersiyski, R, Raycheva, M., et al. (2007). Impaired decision-making in psychopathic heroin addicts. Drug and Alcohol Dependence, 86, 287-289. Springer

336 Neuropsychol Rev (2007) 17:317-336

Verdejo-Garcia, A., Lopez-Torrecillas, F., Gimenez, C. O., & PerezGarcia, M. (2004). Clinical implications and methodological challenges in the study of the neuropsychological correlates of cannabis, stimulant, and opioid abuse. Neuropsychology Review, 14, 1-41. Verdejo-Garcia, A. J., Perales, J. C., & Perez-Garcia, M. (2007). Cognitive impulsivity in cocaine and heroin polysubstance abusers. Addictive Behaviors, 32, 950-966. Verdejo-Garcia, A., & Perez-Garcia, M. (2006). Profile of executive deficits in cocaine and heroin polysubstance users: common and differential effects on separate executive components. Psychopharmacology, Epub ahead of print, 30 November 2006. Verdejo-Garcia, A., & Perez-Garcia, M. (2007). Ecological assessment of executive functions in substance dependent individuals. Drug and Alcohol Dependence, Epub ahead of print (21 March 2007). Verdejo-Garcia, A., Toribio, I., Orozco, C., Puente, K. L., & PerezGarcia, M. (2005). Neuropsychological functioning in methadone maintenance patients versus abstinent heroin abusers. Drug and Alcohol Dependence, 78, 238-288. Virmani, A., Binienda, Z., Ali, S., & Gaetani, F. (2006). Links between nutrition, drug abuse, and the metabolic syndrome. Vocci, F. J., Acri, J., & Elkashef, A. (2005). Medication development for addictive disorders: The state of the science. American Journal of Psychiatry, 162, 1432—1440. Vogt, B. A., Wiley, R. G., & Jensen, E. L. (1995). Localization of MuOpioid and Delta-Opioid Receptors to Anterior Cingulate Afferents and Projection Neurons and Input-Output Model of Mu Regulation. Experimental Neurology, 135, 83-92. Volkow, N. D., Chang, L., Wang, G. J., Fowler, J. S., Ding, Y. S., Sedler, M., et al. (2001a). Low level of brain dopamine D-2 receptors in methamphetamine abusers: Association with metabolism in the orbitofrontal cortex. American Journal of Psychiatry, 158, 2015-2021. Volkow, N. D., Chang, L., Wang, G. J., Fowler, J. S., Franceschi, D., Sedler, M., et al. (2001b). Loss of dopamine transporters in methamphetamine abusers recovers with protracted abstinence. Journal of Neuroscience, 21, 9414-9418. Volkow, N. D., Chang, L., Wang, G. J., Fowler, J. S., Franceschi, D., Sedler, M. J., et al. (2001c). Higher cortical and lower subcortical metabolism in detoxified methamphetamine abusers. American Journal of Psychiatry, 158, 383-389. Volkow, N. D., Chang, L., Wang, G. J., Fowler, J. S., Leonido-Yee, M., Franceschi, D., et al. (200Id). Association of dopamine transporter reduction with psychomotor impairment in methamphetamine abusers. American Journal of Psychiatry, 158, 377382.  
Volkow, N. D., Fowler, J. S., & Wang, G. J. (2003). The addicted human brain: Insights from imaging studies. Journal of Clinical Investigation, 111, 1444-1451. Volkow, N. D., Fowler, J. S., & Wang, G. J. (2004a). The addicted human brain viewed in the light of imaging studies: Brain circuits and treatment strategies. Neuropharmacology, 47, 3-13. Volkow, N. D., Fowler, J. S., Wang, G. J., & Swanson, J. M. (2004b). Dopamine in drug abuse and addiction: Results from imaging studies and treatment implications. Molecular Psychiatry, 9, 557-569. Volkow, N. D., Gur, R. C., Wang, G. J., Fowler, J. S., Moberg, P. J., Ding, Y. S., et al. (1998). Association between decline in brain dopamine activity with age and cognitive and motor impairment in healthy individuals. American Journal of Psychiatry, 155, 344—349. Wagner, G. C., Tekirian, T. L., & Cheo, C. T. (1993). Sexual differences in sensitivity to methamphetamine toxicity. Journal of Neural Transmission-General Section, 93, 67—70. Wang, G. J., Volkow, N. D., Chang, L., Miller, E., Sedler, M., Hitzemann, R., et al. (2004). Partial recovery of brain metabolism in methamphetamine abusers after protracted abstinence. American Journal of Psychiatry, 161, 242—248. Wang, G. J., Volkow, N. D., Fowler, J. S., Logan, J., Abumrad, N. N., Hilzemann, R. J., et al. (1997). Dopamine D-2 receptor availability in opiate-dependent subjects before and after naloxone-precipitated withdrawal. Neuropsychopharmacology, 16, 174—182. Warner, R. M. & Srinivasan, J. (2004). Protean manifestations of intravenous drug use. Surgeon-Journal of the Royal Colleges of Surgeons of Edinburgh and Ireland, 2, 137-140. Weinstein, C. S. & Shaffer, H. J. (1993). Neurocognitive aspects of substance-abuse treatment—a psychotherapists primer. Psychotherapy, 30, 317-333. WHO (2004). Neuroscience of psychoactive substance use and dependence. Geneva, CH: WHO Publications. Woods, S. P., Rippeth, J. D., Conover, E., Gongvatana, A., Gonzalez, R., Carey, C. L., et al. (2005). Deficient strategic control of verbal encoding and retrieval in individuals with methamphetamine dependence. Neuropsychology, 19, 35—43. Wykes, T., Reeder, C., Williams, C., Comer, J., Rice, C., & Everitt, B. (2003). Are the effects of cognitive remediation therapy (CRT) durable? Results from an exploratory trial in schizophrenia. Schizophrenia Research, 61, 163-174. Yu, Q., Larson, D. F., & Watson, R. R. (2003). Heart disease, methamphetamine and AIDS. Life Sciences, 73, 129-140. Yucel, M., Lubman, D. I., Harrison, B. J., Fomito, A., Allen, N. B., Wellard, R. M., et al. (2007). A combined spectroscopic and functional MRI investigation of the dorsal anterior cingulate region in opiate addiction. Molecular Psychiatry.

Springer
