# The Adderall Epidemic A Proposed Cyclic Relations

Page 1 of 11 Impulse'. The Premier Undergraduate Neuroscience Journal 2021 The Adderall Epidemic: A Proposed Cyclic Relationship between ADHD Medication Use, Academic Performance, and Mental Distress Dennis Cregin, Rebecca Koltun, Sana Malik, Devon Umeozor, Lina Begdache The State University of New York at Binghamton, Binghamton, New York 13902 Attention-deficit/hyperactivity disorder medications are used illicitly by undergraduate students, often to increase focus, memory, and attention in order to enhance their academic performance. Studies on such unprescribed use of psychostimulants suggest that these medications have countereffects and yield cognitive deficits. The purpose of this study was to examine the relationship between ADHD medication use and academic performance as indicated by individuals’ reported grade point average (GPA). Moreover, this study aimed to establish a relationship between the aversive side effects associated with ADHD medication use on physical health, mental health, and academic performance. A total of 879 individuals completed an anonymous Google Form survey that was administered at colleges/universities in the U.S. using social media platforms. The survey included questions regarding frequency of ADHD medication use, symptoms experienced, perception of safety, GPA, and general demographic information. Our results indicate that the use of ADHD medication is significantly correlated with a self-reported low GPA as well as an increase in reported mental health side effects (including depression, anxiety, and panic attacks) and physical side effects (including sleep disturbances, fatigue, headaches, and weight loss). Conversely, belief in the efficacy of ADHD medications in aiding academic performance was negatively correlated with a self-reported high GPA. It thus appears that the use of non-prescription ADHD medications is not associated with increased academic performance. Furthermore, mental and physical symptoms related to illicit ADHD medication use are likely to contribute to the observed poor academic performance. It is therefore recommended that college student populations are educated on these findings to decrease illicit use of ADHD medications as study aids. Abbreviations: ADHD - Attention Deficit Hyperactivity Disorder; DA - Dopamine; GPA - Grade Point Average Keywords: stimulant; dopamine; substance use and abuse; GPA; mental health; college

Introduction ADHD and the Mechanism of Adderall Attention-deficit/hyperactivity disorder (ADHD) is a neurobehavioral condition characterized by inattention, hyperactivity, and impulsivity that can impair an individual’s cognitive abilities (Castells et al., 2018). While the disorder primarily impacts children, its diagnosis has recently become more prevalent among adults (Volkow et al., 2009). ADHD is  
often associated with disruptions in the dopaminergic pathway in the brain, namely a deficiency of dopamine in the synapse (Volkow et al., 2009). Dopamine (DA) is a neurotransmitter and, more specifically, a catecholamine, which is a division of hormones associated with the reward and motivation pathway (Mishra et al., 2018). Thus, a disruption in its neural transmission often leads to an increased difficulty maintaining focus and completing tasks. Furthermore, studies have shown that subjects with ADHD exhibit similar

Page 2 of 11 The Adderall Epidemic: A Proposed … Relationship between ADHD Medication Use, Academic Performance, and Mental Distress 2021

impairments in the brain as subjects with lesions of the prefrontal cortex. Individuals diagnosed with ADHD struggle with behavioral inhibition and working memory. While this is not the case for all subjects with ADHD the disorder is, overall, linked to an impairment in executive functioning due to dysfunction in the prefrontal cortex (Amsten, 2006). ADHD medications often attempt to remedy the lack of dopamine and thus alleviate the symptoms associated with the neurological disorder. There are two major divisions of ADHD medication: amphetamines and methylphenidates (Faraone, 2018). Adderall is a commonly prescribed amphetamine-based medication (Joyce et al., 2007). Vyvanse is another example of an amphetamine drug used to treat ADHD. Amphetamines are a class of drugs that increase the concentration of dopamine in the synapse through two principal mechanisms. They act on the dopamine transporters to increase the dopamine concentration in the synapse (Faraone, 2018). Extracellular amphetamine enters the axon terminal and induces dopamine efflux via the dopamine transporter, effectively reversing the normal direction of neurotransmitter flow through the transporter (Kahlig et al., 2005). Amphetamine, thus, redistributes dopamine to the cytosol from their vesicles to promote reverse transport (Sulzer et al., 1995). Additionally, amphetamines inhibit enzymes in the synapse responsible for catecholamine metabolism, further increasing its concentration (Castells et  
ADHD Medication Effects on the Central Nervous System Most medications used to therapeutically treat ADHD are psychostimulants that yield both psychological and physiological effects. The psychological effects of ADHD medication use, as with other stimulants, manifest by acting on the central nervous system, specifically the brain. By increasing the concentration of monoamines in the synaptic cleft, either by blocking reuptake or blocking enzymatic degradation, ADHD medications yield effects on users with ADHD that differ from effects on those without ADHD. Users of ADHD medication who have been medically diagnosed with ADHD often report or experience an increase in attention span, ability to focus, and a marked decrease in impulsive behaviors (Advokat, 2009). Conversely, nonADHD users experience a euphoric “high”, as is common with stimulant drugs, and often report increased motivation, making such drugs attractive for use as study aids (Ricci et al., 2020). Continued use of ADHD medications can result in dysregulation of DA, along with other monoamines, and their receptors. Receptor downregulation and depletion of monoamine concentrations can lead to symptoms of anxiety, depression, decreased motivation, and even stimulant psychosis (Varga, 2012). Use of ADHD medication has a relatively high potential for abuse due to its reinforcing effects, some of which include the alleviation of the aforementioned symptoms associated with

al., 2018). Common examples of withdrawal or abstinence from drug use. The

methylphenidate include Ritalin and Concerta. Lower doses of Adderall have been shown to produce similar effects to higher doses of Ritalin, evidencing the potency of amphetamine-based medications (Pelham et al., 1999). Rather than promoting reverse transport at the dopamine transporter, methylphenidate blocks reuptake by the transporters to similarly increase dopamine levels in the synapse (Volkow et al., 2002). Postsynaptic receptors downregulate themselves to adjust to a hyperdopaminergic environment. Thus, once the user stops taking ADHD medication, withdrawal symptoms contributing to addiction can occur (Yanofski, 2011).  
action of ADHD medication in the central nervous system yields psychological effects that can both positively and negatively reinforce its continued use. Illicit Use of ADHD Medication on College Campuses As college enrollment continues to rise and admissions become increasingly competitive, many students have turned to prescription stimulants in order to gain an advantage over their peers (Rolland and Smith, 2017). While most prevalent in college, illicit use of ADHD medications has been estimated by a study to be around 4.5% among high schoolers (McCabe et al., 2004). ADHD medications such as Adderall,

Ritalin, and Vyvanse have become the drugs of choice for those who seek to enhance their academic performance by pharmacological rather than conventional study methods. The nonprescription use of ADHD medication among college students has been tracked since 1937 (Arria et al., 2017). In 2015, 10.7% of college students used ADHD medication outside of a prescription, with other estimates putting this number as high as 33.8% (Arria et al., 2017). Adderall and other ADHD medications are displayed in various headlines across media outlets as “smart drugs” and their use as “smart doping” (Arria and Dupont, 2010). This has prompted the belief among many college students that taking these drugs without the direction of a medical professional is not a reason for concern and is largely benign (Arria and Dupont, 2010). However, a growing number of studies have shown that students who use prescription stimulants such as Adderall for nonmedical purposes have a lower grade point average than students who abstain from stimulants (Arria and Dupont, 2010). To compensate, they continue to consume ADHD medication to deal with the increasing levels of stress brought upon by their lackluster academics (Rolland and Smith, 2017). Efficacy of ADHD Medication as a Study Aid The nonmedical use of prescription stimulants, which include several common ADHD medications, as study aids is a ubiquitous practice among college students in the United States. However, its efficacy with illicit use in improving GPA, cognition, learning, and academic performance in general has not consistently proven to be significant or even present. A survey of secondand third-year college students conducted by Arria et al. (2017) failed to note any significant improvement in GPA upon initiation or continuation of nonprescription stimulant use. Further, the expectation to receive a non-prescription stimulant does not improve cognitive performance: individuals report feeling more stimulated having received placebo if told it was methylphenidate compared to a control group, though no significant difference in cognitive performance has been observed (Looby and Earleywine, 2011). This subjective feeling of stimulation can be perceived, often wrongly, by  
Page 3 of 11 Impulse'. The Premier Undergraduate Neuroscience Journal 2021 illicit users of ADHD medications as an enhancement of their ability to focus, retain information, and learn new material. While some studies suggest that stimulant use can enhance certain types of cognitive performance, this enhancement often comes with a cost, as increased errors are often observed along with an impairment of one’s ability to master tasks of high complexity (Iversen, 2006; Fischman, 1984). Moreover, the effectiveness of ADHD medications when used illicitly as study aids can be attenuated by the phenomenon of statedependent learning, which states that recall of information learned under the influence of a particular drug is most efficient when under the influence of that specific drug (Poling and Cross, 1993). Thus, information learned while under the influence of ADHD medication often cannot be effectively retrieved upon the dissipation of the drug’s physiological and psychological effects (i.e. upon metabolism and elimination). Consequently, use of ADHD medications while studying can, in fact, be counterproductive in terms of enhancing understanding of the material and may contribute to the inefficacy of such drugs at increasing academic performance, especially when used illicitly. Limitations of Past Work and Current Objectives Previous research has focused disproportionately on the cognitive effects of ADHD medication on individuals diagnosed with ADHD (Weyandt et al., 2018). Moreover, the limited research done on illicit ADHD medication use has studied mental and physical side effects along with academic outcomes, but in isolation from each other. The mental and physical health side effects prompted by illicit use have not been linked to observed decreases in academic performance in past investigations. Therefore, the objective of this study is to test the hypothesis that a cyclic relationship between the illicit use of ADHD medication, its adverse side effects, and decreases in grade point average exists. This will be accomplished by investigating the individual correlational relationships between use, physical health, mental health, and selfreported GPA.

Page 4 of 11 The Adderall Epidemic: A Proposed … Relationship between ADHD Medication Use, Academic Performance, and Mental Distress 2021

Methods The study protocol was reviewed and approved by the Institutional Review Board at Binghamton University. Inclusion criteria were being 18 years or older and being enrolled in a US college. The anonymous survey was built in Google Forms and the link was sent through social media platforms requesting responses from US college students. Participants consented to the study by accessing the survey. For Binghamton University data collection, the survey was shared on social media and advertised at tabling events on campus. No compensation or incentive were provided for participation. A total of 879 college students completed the survey. The survey included 40 questions assessing demographics, psychostimulant use, academic performance, and physical and mental health among others. In order to determine if there is a relationship between study drugs, mental health, and GPA, the survey asked both multiple choice and free response questions regarding demographics, prescribed and nonprescribed Adderall use, its effects, and perceptions. Demographic information was collected in this survey using questions asking participants about their gender, age, major, class year, GPA, college of enrollment, and ethnicity. Additionally, in order to reasonably discern the difference between prescribed and nonprescribed Adderall use, participants who indicated they had taken ADHD medication in the past were asked if this drug was ever formally prescribed to them by a medical professional. If not, additional questions were asked that inquired about the motive behind this unprescribed use. Answer choices for these questions were used to determine if unprescribed Adderall use resulted as a result of pressure to perform academically, weight management, etc. When looking at the effects of unprescribed ADHD medication usage, participants were asked various questions regarding how such use affected them academically, physically, and mentally. Finally, in regard to perceptions, participants were asked about the formal education they had received about Adderall and other drugs in the past. An example of a question from the survey was as follows: “If NOT prescribed by a licensed  
physician, what do you use these medications for? (If this does not apply to you, please skip): Improving academic performance. Weight management, Alertness and awakeness, In combination with other intoxicating substances for recreational purposes. Focus and concentration. Prefer not to say, I am prescribed for ADHD medication. Other.” Several responses were recorded on a 6-point Likert-scale. In this survey, psychostimulants were defined as “but not limited to: Adderall, Ritalin, Concerta, or Vyvanse.” The classification used to determine the ranges of GPA that qualified as high or low was based upon the GPA requirements for most graduate schools (Kuther, 2018). Using such criteria, a GPA below 3.0 was considered low whereas a GPA of 3.5 or greater was considered high. Data were analyzed by employing Pearson’s Correlation Coefficient in SPSS 25. Results Physical and Mental Effects of ADHD Medication Use Participants (n=879) reported several physical and mental side outcomes that had statistically significant correlations with daily non-prescription ADHD medication use (Table 1). There was no differentiation made between different ADHD medications. Adderall, Ritalin, Concerta, and Vyvanse were the drugs classified as ADHD medication in this study. Physical side effects reported included aggression, fatigue, headaches, and panic attacks. Daily ADHD medication users also reported symptoms affecting mental health including depression, inability to concentrate, irritability, lack of motivation, and paranoia (p<0.01) (Table 1). GPA Results showed a statistically significant (p<0.05) positive correlation between low GPA and daily and weekly use of ADHD medication, regardless of whether this medication was prescribed or not. There was also a positive correlation between low GPA and non-prescribed ADHD medication use in general (Table 2).

Table 1: Daily ADHD Medication Use and Associated Physical and Mental Outcomes (contd.) Physical and Mental Characteristics of Daily Users of Non-prescribed ADHD  
Page 5 of 11 Impulse'. The Premier Undergraduate Neuroscience Journal 2021 Table 3: Characteristics of Participants with a Marked or Slight Decrease in GPA after Unprescribed ADHD Medication Use Characteristics of Users with a Marked Decrease in GPA

Medication Lack of Motivation Focus Anxiety Mood Swings Headaches Fatigue Sleep Difficulty Aggression Depression/Negative Affect  
.122* -.107* 0.083* 0.107** 0.168** 0.183** 0.167** 0.388** 0.165**  
Daily Use Inability to Concentrate Weight Loss Characteristics of Users with a Slight Decrease in GPA Lack of Motivation Depression/Negative Affect *=p<0.05 **=p<0.01  
0.136* 0.187** 0.231** 0.197** 0.265**

Fatigue Headaches Inability to concentrate Irritability Lack of Motivation Panic Attacks Paranoia *=p<0.05 **=p<0.01  
0.175** 0.233 0.300 0.277** 0.130** 0.146** 0.187**  
Conversely, as shown in Table 4, there was a statistically significant negative correlation between participants with a high GPA and the belief that ADHD medication benefits one academically (p<0.05). Furthermore, there was also a negative correlation between having a high GPA and the reported outcomes of nonprescribed ADHD medication use of an inability to concentrate and suicidal thoughts (p<0.05). Finally, there was a positive correlation between

Table 2: Participants with a Low GPA and Variations of Adderall Use Frequency of Use  
high GPA and no unintended side effects (p<0.05).

Unprescribed ADHD Medication 0.132* Table 4: Characteristics of Participants with a High GPA

Use Daily use of ADHD Medication Weekly use of ADHD Medication *=p<0.05 **=p<0.01  
0.720* 0.086*  
Characteristics and Side Effects Belief that ADHD medication benefits one academically Inability to Concentrate  
-0.71* -0.088*

GPA and Associated Outcomes As shown in Table 3 below, participants with a marked decrease in GPA (—1.0) after unprescribed ADHD medication use reported the inability to concentrate and weight loss (p<0.01).  
Suicidal Thoughts No Unintended Side Effects *=p<0.05 **=p<0.01 Comorbid Use of Other Substances  
-0.76* 0.193*

Participants who saw a marked decrease in GPA also reported daily use of nonprescribed ADHD medication (p<0.05). Those who saw a slight decrease in GPA (~ -0.5) after unprescribed use reported a lack of motivation and depression/negative affect (p<0.01).  
As shown in Table 5, a relationship exists between the frequency of ADHD medication use and the use of other drugs. There exists a statistically significant positive relationship between the daily use of ADHD medication and the usage of cocaine (p<0.01) and marijuana (p<0.05). Furthermore, there was a statistically significant positive relationship between the

Page 6 of 11 The Adderall Epidemic: A Proposed … Relationship between ADHD Medication Use, Academic Performance, and Mental Distress 2021

monthly use of ADHD medication and the usage of cocaine, marijuana, and alcohol (p<0.01). Table 5: Relationship between the Frequency of ADHD Medication Use and the Use of Other Drugs  
difficulty sleeping, 2) ADHD medication use was negatively correlated with reported levels of focus, 3) Individuals who used ADHD medication without a prescription daily and weekly were more likely to report a low GPA,

Frequency of ADHD Medication Use Once a day Once a month  
Comorbidity Significance Cocaine .096** cc .289**  
and 4) Individuals with a high GPA were less likely to believe that ADHD medication aids in academic performance. These correlational findings indicate that use of psychostimulant ADHD medication, both prescribed and illicit, may be related to a range of psychological and physical side effects that eventually contribute to

Once a day Once a month Once a day Once a month *=p<0.05 **=p<0.01  
Marijuana cc Alcohol cc  
.076* .215** .091 .184**  
a decrease in academic performance and ability to focus. Inefficacy of ADHD Medication The correlational results of this study indicate that the efficacy of unprescribed use of ADHD medications, particularly amphetamine

The correlation in Table 6 shows a statistically significant positive relationship between the recreational use of ADHD medication and the use of prescription painkillers such as Oxycodone, Percocet, Vicodin, etc. (p<0.05). Table 6: Relationship Between Recreational Use of ADHD Medication and Prescription Painkillers  
and methylphenidate, at increasing cognition, memory, and learning is unsubstantial. Specifically, students reported a marked decrease in GPA following unprescribed daily ADHD medication use; they also noted an inability to concentrate. A literature review cites mounting evidence of the inefficacy of ADHD medication at promoting learning ability and academic performance in “adult college students with ADHD” as well as a lack of observed

Use of prescription painkillers (Oxycodone, Percocet, Vicodin, etc.) *=p<0.05 **=p<0.01 Discussion  
.224*  
improvement in measures of ‘planning’ and ‘distractibility’ (Advokat and Scheithauer, 2013). Survey data from this study indicated that participants with a slight decrease in GPA (—0.5) after unprescribed ADHD medication use also reported a lack of motivation. Even occasional use of stimulants has been shown to yield academic performance deficits, an implication that is especially

The purpose of this study was to investigate the relationship between both prescribed and illicit ADHD medication use and academic performance. Data were analyzed to assess the correlation of non-prescription medication use to focus and mental distress among college students. Increasing focus is often referenced as a reason for use. The main findings of this study were as follows: 1) ADHD medication use was highly correlated with adverse side effects including a reported lack of motivation, headaches, fatigue, weight loss, and  
important to college students whose use of ADHD medication study drugs may be intermittent rather than consistent. This survey indicated a correlation between low GPA and both daily and weekly use of ADHD medication. Moreover, use of stimulants has proven to aid more in rote-memorization tasks rather than complex memory tasks, which is more likely to be tested on college examinations (Eakhan and Kirchgessner, 2012). This finding may contribute to the low GPA observed among illicit and nonillicit users of ADHD medication in this survey. In sum, the findings of this study parallel those of

the current literature in that they demonstrate a relationship between use of ADHD medication and its inefficacy in yielding increased levels of focus, memory, learning, and cognition among users. Proposal of a Cyclic Relationship The central objective of this study was to test the hypothesis of the existence of a cyclic relationship between ADHD medication use, academic performance, and negative side effects of stimulant use, whereby ADHD medication use is sustained. This relationship can be seen in Figure 1. There are three principal relationships to examine. Firstly, those who use ADHD medication are more likely to experience a lack of motivation, sleep difficulty, fatigue, and other negative mental health symptoms as shown in Table 1. Existing literature has shown that mental effects associated with decreased dopamine levels of long-term use include anxiety, depression, and panic attacks (Brutvan et al., 2012; American Addiction Centers, 2020). A study conducted at the University of Nebraska indicated that those who reported illicit use of ADHD medication were more likely to suffer from anxiety and depression (Rolland and Smith, 2017). Symptoms of ADHD medication use can include decreased motivation, fatigue, appetite suppression, insomnia, dry mouth, and cravings for continued dosages of ADHD medication (Ahmann et al., 2001; Lakhan and Kirchgessner, 2012). The second relationship to examine is as follows: those who take ADHD medication daily are more likely to have a low GPA (Table 2). In one study by the University of Rhode Island, a negative correlation was found between those who used illicit ADHD medication and GPA (Weyandt et al., 2009). Researchers attributed this correlation to the fact that illicit use of ADHD  
Page 7 of 11 Impulse'. The Premier Undergraduate Neuroscience Journal 2021 medication provokes psychological distress within users, which can hamper academic performance (Weyandt et al., 2009). The third relationship to examine exists between mental health and academic performance. A study by Frojd et al. (2008) on students ages 13-17 indicated that depression is associated with difficulties in concentration, self-reliant school performance and reading/writing, and perceived workload. Another study indicated the negative correlation between motivation and performance on standardized and academic assessments (Keogh et al., 2006). In addition, Begdache et al. (2019) reported a strong relationship between anxiety, low GPA, and ADHD drug abuse. Thus, these correlational relationships allow a cyclic relationship to be proposed in which those who have a low GPA take ADHD medication in order to help them improve their academic performance. Those who take the medication are more likely to experience negative mental health side effects, which in turn can lead to a decrease in GPA, which restarts the deleterious cycle. Therefore, students with a low GPA and/or poor mental health are at risk of illicit use of ADHD medication and of entering and remaining in the cycle. On the other hand, students with a high GPA are less likely to believe that ADHD medication benefits one academically and are less likely to experience unintended side effects from the illicit use (Table 4). Furthermore, students with a high GPA are less likely to experience an inability to concentrate and suicidal thoughts. Given these findings, it is evident that students with a high GPA are less likely to follow this dangerous cycle because of their beliefs, ability to concentrate, and lack of suicidal thoughts. While data from this study and existing literature supports the suggestion of a causal relationship, ultimately, the data is correlational and does not confirm causality. Significance and Educational Applicability of Findings One of the main factors that has influenced the rise of Adderall usage and other ADHD medications on college campuses is that many students are not adequately educated on the harm such substances can have on their physical

Page 8 of 11 The Adderall Epidemic: A Proposed … Relationship between ADHD Medication Use, Academic Performance, and Mental Distress 2021

and psychological health. Students often are misinformed on the effects of illicit ADHD medication use, often considering it to be a safer drug than cocaine, marijuana, or even caffeine (Ricci et al., 2020). In order to help alleviate this problem, college administrators should be focused on educating students on the dangers of ADHD medication abuse, while also introducing safer, more effective alternatives. Education methods may include procuring funds to organize educational presentations, seminars, and awareness campaigns to better educate students on the prevalence of illicit ADHD medication use as well as healthier alternatives. Existing programs on college campuses addressing alcohol and marijuana use may also be expanded to cover illicit psychostimulant use and the comorbidity of such drugs, using existing data as evidence. Alternatives to illicit ADHD medication use should also be presented to students, which may include expanding mental health outreach programs and on-campus tutoring centers to better serve students struggling academically. Attention should also be brought to the development of healthier habits to minimize the risk of students turning to illicit psychostimulant use to increase academic performance. These practices may include exercising, staying hydrated, eating energysustaining foods, and getting 7-8 hours of sleep every night (Trockel et al., 2000; Reuter et al., 2020). Such goals can be effectively achieved through disseminating information on this topic across college campuses using the standards proposed by Health Belief Model Theory. The Health Belief Model Theory details that messages relating to issues of health will see the best behavior change in the intended population if such messages successfully target perceived barriers, benefits, self-efficacy, and susceptibility (Jones et al., 2014). In order for college students to truly understand that ADHD medication abuse is dangerous and can pose serious harm to their well-being, education on this topic must be tailored to successfully dispel many of the preconceived notions students have of these drugs. As for the educational outreach approaches, survey participants stated that sharing real life stories (38.9%) and negative side effects (35.9%) would be likely to dissuade their  
personal unprescribed psychostimulant use (Ricci et al., 2020). This is the most effective way in which to curb illicit prescription stimulant use, as it directly contradicts many ideas college students previously held about such substances. By integrating these measures into future seminars and information sessions, colleges may begin to effectively curb rates of illicit prescription stimulant use across their undergraduate population. Limitations and Future Research The data presented showed the correlation between illicit ADHD medication use and the factors of mental health, physical health, and GPA. Though correlational relationships could be deduced from these findings, it should be emphasized that this data does not show that illicit ADHD medication use causes certain health effects or changes in GPA. For example, the statistically significant finding correlating depression and ADHD medication use does not mean that this drug use causes depression or depression causes drug use. One limitation of this study was that it was not longitudinal. Changes in mental and physical effects or GPA were not reported over a certain time period of ADHD medication use. Instead, ADHD medication use was correlated with whether these specific hallmarks were observed at any point in time. So while the data showed that there was a statistically significant correlation between ADHD medication use and low GPA, data concerning a specific decrease in GPA while using Adderall was not collected. For future research, a longitudinal study could be conducted to specifically quantify any changes in GPA among different levels of ADHD medication misuse. Other factors to consider that potentially could have confounding effects on the results are polydrug and alcohol use as well as comorbidity. Data from the survey showed statistically significant positive correlations between ADHD medication use and recreational use of marijuana, alcohol, cocaine, and prescription painkillers. Existing literature has shown that a dysfunctional prefrontal cortex, a referenced effect of illicit ADHD medication use, is related to impaired decision-making (Goldstein and Volkow, 2011). This impaired decision-making could thus result

in possible risky use of other substances illicitly, such as marijuana, alcohol, cocaine, and prescription painkillers. Another study found that consumption of alcohol more than twice a week and recreational painkiller use was positively correlated with non-prescription psychostimulant use, resulting in priming of the brain for continued substance use (Ricci et al., 2020). Thus, the confounding effects of such polydrug use must be considered when interpreting survey results. Previous studies have shown how alcohol abuse is often associated with an increased likelihood of having other addictive and psychiatric disorders (Regier et al., 1990; Kessler et al., 1997; Bucholz, 1999). Considering the effects of comorbidity, shown in Tables 5 and 6, it cannot be concluded that the correlation between ADHD medication use and low GPA is restricted to those two variables. Rather, the use of another drug, such as marijuana, could simultaneously factor into an individual’s academic performance. Similarly, the effects of alcohol, cocaine, and prescription painkillers could possibly have an effect on mental health and GPA as well. For future research, the effects of comorbidity could be accounted for by conducting a longitudinal study where illicit use of other drugs, such as alcohol, marijuana, and cocaine, are controlled. Lastly, because the data was collected through a survey form, it is important to consider the effect of self-report bias. Individual perspectives, backgrounds, experiences, and opinions can all affect the way a participant interprets and answers a question. Despite being confidential, social desirability and cultural norms may also have impacted participants’ answers to survey questions. Conclusions This study examined the relationship between illicit ADHD medication use and academic performance of students enrolled in US colleges. Along with academic performance, which was measured by individuals’ selfreported grade point average, physical and mental side effects were also measured by the distributed survey. The analyzed data revealed that ADHD medication use was significantly correlated with low GPA and increased mental health side effects, which included anxiety, depression, and  
Page 9 of 11 Impulse'. The Premier Undergraduate Neuroscience Journal 2021 panic attacks. Additionally, ADHD medication use was significantly correlated with physical side effects, including fatigue, headaches, and sleep disturbances. It was also found that a selfreported high GPA was negatively correlated with the belief in the efficacy of ADHD medications in aiding academic performance. Using data from this survey and existing literature, the existence of a cyclic relationship between ADHD medication use, academic performance, and negative side effects was proposed. This cyclic relationship proposed that the negative mental and physical effects of ADHD medication use and a decrease in academic performance sustains continued ADHD medication use. Acknowledgements We thank all 879 students who filled out our survey and allowed us to collect significant results. We also thank our research team predecessors, Adelle Ricci, Lee Ann Genussa, and Eva Kristoferson, who aided in the collection of survey responses used in this study. Corresponding Author Dennis Cregin The State University of New York at Binghamton Health and Wellness Dept. P.O. Box 6000 Binghamton, NY 13902 dcreginl@binshamton.edu References Advokat C (2009) What exactly are the benefits of stimulants for ADHD? J Atten Disord 12:6 495-498. Advokat C, Scheithauer M (2013) Attentiondeficit hyperactivity disorder (ADHD) stimulant medications as cognitive enhancers. Front Neurosci 7:82.

Page 10 of 11 The Adderall Epidemic: A Proposed … Relationship between ADHD Medication Use, Academic Performance, and Mental Distress 2021

Ahmann PA, Theye FW, Berg R, Linquist AJ, Van Erem AJ, Campbell LR (2001) Placebocontrolled evaluation of amphetamine  
psychiatric comorbidities. Neurosci Biobehav Rev 87:255-270. Fischman MW (1984) The behavioral

mixture-dextroamphetamine salts and pharmacology of cocaine in humans. In:

amphetamine salts (Adderall): efficacy rate and side effects. Pediatrics 107:1 E10. American Addiction Centers (2020) Side Effects of Adderall: Depression, Anxiety and Raised Heart Rate. American Addiction Centers  
Cocaine: Pharmacology, effects, and treatment of abuse (Grabowski J, ed), pp7291. Washington, DC: NIDA Office of Science. Frojd SA, Nissinen ES, Pelkonen MU, Marttunen

Available https://americanaddictioncenters.org/adderall  
at:  
MJ, Koivisto A, Kaltiala-Heino R (2008) Depression and school performance in middle

/side-effects [Accessed November 15, 2020], Amsten AF (2006) Stimulants: Therapeutic  
adolescent boys and girls. J Adolesc 31:4 485-498.

actions in ADHD. Goldstein RZ, Volkow ND (2011) Dysfunction

Neuropsychopharmacology 31:11 2376of the prefrontal cortex in addiction:

1. neuroimaging findings and clinical

Arria AM, Caldeira KM, Vincent KB, O'Grady KE, Cimini MD, Geisner IM, Larimer ME (2017) Do college students improve their grades by using prescription stimulants nonmedically? Addict Behav 65:245-249. Arria AM, DuPont RL (2010) Nonmedical prescription stimulant use among college students: why we need to do something and what we need to do. J Addict Dis 4:417-26. Begdache L, Kianmehr H, Sabounchi N, Marszalek A, Dolma N (2019) Principal  
implications. Nat Rev Neurosci 12:11 652669. Iversen LL (2006) Speed, ecstasy, ritalin: The science of amphetamines. Oxford, UK: Oxford UP. Jones CL, Jensen JD, Scherr CL, Brown NR, Christy K, Weaver J (2014) The health belief model as an explanatory framework in communication research: exploring parallel, serial, and moderated mediation. Health Commun 30:6 566-576.

component regression of academic Joyce BM, Glaser PE, Gerhardt GA (2007)

performance, substance use and sleep quality in relation to risk of anxiety and depression in  
Adderall produces increased striatal dopamine release and a prolonged time course compared

young adults. Trends Neurosci Educ 15:29to amphetamine isomers.

1. Brutvan LJ, Medeiros NJ, Lagoy RC, Suddapalli S (2012) Adderall abuse at Worcester Polytechnic Institute: A study of the  
Psychopharmacology 191:3 669-677. Kahlig KM, Binda F, Khoshbouei H, Blakely RD, McMahon DG, Javitch JA, Galli A (2005) Amphetamine induces dopamine

undergraduate Available  
population.  
DigitalWPI at:  
efflux through a dopamine transporter channel. Proc Natl Acad Sci U S A 102:9

https://digital.wpi.edu/concem/student_work s/bn9997013?locale=en [Accessed January 9, 2021], Bucholz KK (1999) Nosology and epidemiology of addictive disorders and their comorbidity. Psychiatr Clin North Am 22:2 221-240. Castells X, Blanco-Silvente L, Cunill R (2018)  
3495-3500. Keogh E, Bond FW, Flaxman PE (2006) Improving academic performance and mental health through a stress management intervention: Outcomes and mediators of change. Behav Res Ther 44:3 339-357. Kessler RC, Crum RM, Warner LA, Nelson CB,

Amphetamines for attention deficit Schulenberg J, Anthony JC (1997) Lifetime

hyperactivity disorder (ADHD) in adults. Cochrane Database Syst Rev 8. Faraone SV (2018) The pharmacology of  
co-occurrence of DSM-III-R alcohol abuse and dependence with other psychiatric disorders in the National Comorbidity Survey.

amphetamine and methylphenidate: Arch Gen Psychiatry 54:4 313-321.

Relevance to the neurobiology of attentiondeficit/hyperactivity disorder and other  
Kuther T (2018) The Role of GPA in Graduate School Admissions. ThoughtCo Available at:

https://www.thoughtco.com/gpa-role-ingraduate-school-admissions-1685863 [Accessed January 25, 2021], Lakhan SE, Kirchgessner A (2012) Prescription stimulants in individuals with and without attention deficit hyperactivity disorder: misuse, cognitive impact, and adverse effects. Brain Behav 2:5 661-677. Looby A, Earleywine M (2011) Expectation to receive methylphenidate enhances subjective arousal but not cognitive performance. Exp Clin Psychopharmacol 19:6 433-444. McCabe SE, Teter CJ, Boyd CJ (2004) The use, misuse and diversion of prescription stimulants among middle and high school students. Subst Use Misuse 39:7 1095-1116. Mishra A, Singh S, Shukla S (2018) Physiological and functional basis of dopamine receptors and their role in neurogenesis: Possible implication for Parkinson's disease. J Exp Neurosci 12. Pelham WE, Aronoff HR, Midlam JK, Shapiro CJ, Gnagy EM, Chronis AM, Onyango AN, Forehand G, Nguyen A, Waxmonsky J (1999) A comparison of Ritalin and Adderall: Efficacy and time-course in children with  
Page 11 of 11 Impulse'. The Premier Undergraduate Neuroscience Journal 2021 college campuses. Alpenglow: Binghamton University Undergraduate Journal 6:1. Rolland AD, Smith PJ (2017) Aided by Adderall: Illicit use of ADHD medications by college students. The Journal of the National Collegiate Honors Council 18:2 41-77. Sulzer D, Chen TK, Lau YY, Kristensen H, Rayport S, A Ewing (1995) Amphetamine redistributes dopamine from synaptic vesicles to the cytosol and promotes reverse transport. J Neurosci 15:5 4102-4108. Trockel MT, Barnes MD, Egget DL (2000) Health-related variables and academic performance among first-year college students: Implications for sleep and other behaviors. J of ACH, 49:3 125-131. Varga MD (2012) Adderall abuse on college campuses: A comprehensive literature review. J Evid Based Soc Work 9:3 293-313. Volkow ND, Fowler JS, Wang G, Ding Y, Gatley SJ (2002) Mechanism of action of methylphenidate: insights from PET imaging studies. J Atten Disord 6 Suppl l:S31-43. Volkow ND, Wang GJ, Kollins SH, Wigal TL, Newcom JH, Telang F, Fowler JS, Zhu W, Logan J, Ma Y, Pradhan K, Wong C, Swanson

attention-deficit/hyperactivity Pediatrics 103:4 e43.  
disorder.  
JM (2009) Evaluating dopamine reward pathway in ADHD: clinical implications.

Poling A, Cross J (1993) State-dependent learning. In: Methods in behavioral pharmacology (van Haaren F, ed), pp245256. Amsterdam: Elsevier. Regier DA, Farmer ME, Rae DS, Locke BZ, Keith SJ, Judd LL, Goodwin FK (1990) Comorbidity of mental disorders with alcohol and other drug abuse. Results from the epidemiologic catchment area (ECA) study. JAMA 264:19 2511-2518. Reuter PR, Forster BL, Brister SR (2020) The influence of eating habits on the academic performance of university students. J of ACH 1-7.  
JAMA 302:10 1084-1091. Weyandt LL, Janusis G, Wilson KG, Verdi G, Paquin G, Lopes J, Varejao M, Dussault C (2009) Nonmedical prescription stimulant use among a sample of college students. J Atten Disord 13:3 284-296. Weyandt LL, White TL, Gudmundsdottir BG, Nitenson AZ, Rathkey ES, De Leon KA, Bjorn SA (2018) Neurocognitive, autonomic, and mood effects of Adderall: A pilot study of healthy college students. Pharmacy (Basel) 6:3 58. Yanofski J (2011) The dopamine dilemmapart II: Could stimulants cause tolerance,

Ricci A, Genussa LA, Kristoferson E, Begdache dependence, and paradoxical

L (2020) The Adderall epidemic: Linking illicit Adderall use to mental distress on  
decompensation? Innov Clin Neurosci 8:1 47-53.
