# LinkedIn Email Reverse Lookup

created: March 31, 2022 9:20 PM (UTC)
description: Much like the Facebook Email Reverse Lookup, you are able to do something similar with LinkedIn. Please note a limit of 50 unique email address’s can be searched. To use this chrome extension it requires you to be logged into a LinkedIn account, once logged in and while that page is active only will the extension work. This is due to the request that’s made to the website requiring a valid token/session. Simply provide an email address which is of interest to you and click Search. If a match is found the name, profile id, username will be returned as well as the profile image if one exists. I always recommend using a second account, one which you would’nt be bothered about loosing, when using tools/methods like these. Version 1.0 Published Sep 3, 2019 Download linkedin-email-reverse-lookup-ob.zip MD5 Integrity Verifier 5d59bf3a84672ce09b6f64217abbeeda Important I do obfuscate my source code within the chrome extensions i develop. Because of this some anti virus software and/or windows defender may alert them to being a possible trojan. Disclaimer Always be careful when downloading any Chrome Extension. When downloading, installing and using this Chrome Extension you do so at your own risk. More Extensions Facebook Friends List Generator OSINT & SOCMINT Tooling Facebook Entity Id Parser LinkedIn Email Reverse Lookup Facebook Profile Id Grabber Facebook Email Reverse Lookup
folder: BOOKMRKS-MTHRFCKR / SEARCH PARTY MTHRFCKR! / LINKEDIN
tags: Search, linkedin
url: https://osint.support/chrome-extensions/2019/09/03/linkedin-email-reverse-lookup.html