# Apr 20, 2021

# 9:44 PM
​**==COMATOSE==**​

C

O

M

A

T

O

S

E

by Dustin Smith

1st draft\.

Storyline:

A teen who learns growing up is hard, falls for a girl who betrays him with his best friend and crashes into a tree causing some brain damage and gradually starts feeling and seeing weird things happen\.

Setting:

Brayton, Michigan 2003

Characters:

Allison Murphy, Bill Hoffman, Nick Roberts, Chris Thomas

Description:

Allison: She created the term "SLUT" she moves between Bill and Nick destroying their friendship and causing the worse\. also under the term "Evil"

Bill Hoffman: The good guy never done anything wrong goes 5 miles under the speed limit would bake a cake if u asked him ,but the best friend u could ever ask for he meets Allison first and his whole world changes\. FUBAR

Nick Roberts: the other stoner friend who thinks fart jokes and porn are the two best essentials in life\.

Chris Thomas: the typical stoner friend whod take a bullet for ya

Michelle Hoffman: bills mom

Ken Hoffman: bills dad

Opening Scene starts out twisted blurred pieces of the movie mixed in through the screen Bill Driving and Armor for sleep blasting on the radio Bills covered in blood tears rolling down his eyes as images go across his mind and on the screen you see flashes of nick chris and allsion and lights and nightmares\.

Ideas: after bills accident hes thrown through a parallel universe where everything is different but the same hes able to see things that happen and able to see other things, things that arent normal things that only he can see

Every time something bad happens he bleeds from the wound in his head

Scene 1: \(Night time\) bill driving in the car after Allison has broken his heart \(armor for sleep playing\)

Bills Car: Images of Allison Flash by good and bad, 1 scene being Him bringing her flowers and the two of them kissing, and the next scene Nick Sleeping with Allison, his mom saying just let her go and as his images are flashing in front of him he slams into a tree head on

Main title

Scene 2: 4 months ago

The T\.S\. Restaurant Bill drinking coffee and reading Fear Nothing by dean Koontz \(his personal Favorite\)

Nick and Chris walk in blown out and greet Bill and see whats up

Nick: Sup Chump?

Bill: you see it

Nick: all I see is you reading that dumbass book when theres plenty of better things to be doing on a Friday night\.

Bill: yea like what playing video games or smoking dope?

Chris: or whacking off

Nick: No like checking out chicks or tee peeing Mr\. Bees house

Bill: Well this book has been doin me just fine, besides Christopher Snow is way more interesting then you two and your pot and vandalizing shit\.

Chris: who the hell is Christopher Snow?

Bill: he’s the main character in this book its pretty hardcore man

Nick: \(laughs\) man I cant get over how gay you are

Chris: no shit

Bill: and I cant get over how stoned you two and how many brain cells your Lacking\.

Nick: were not that stoned \(laughs\)

Chris: ya im only hungry enough to eat your mom out haha

Bill: god you guys can be dicks\.

Nick\. Yea but were the only friends you got\.

Bill: No im the only friend you guys have\.

Christ: hes correct nick

Bill: alright so do you guys wanna go see a movie?

Nick: as long as their sum tits and ass im game

Chris: sure

Bill: I think Friday the 13th part 25 is out

Nick: sweet I love slasher movies they always got some slut running around with her panties around her ankles screaming that Jason voorhies is after her just before she finds out its just a big cock stuck in her ass\.

Bill: what? Jesus christ your fucking dumb

Nick: you havent seen the porno where jason does these chicks in the ass? I think its called Jason does Crystal Lake Camp Sluts\.

Chris: haha ill have to rent that

Bill: you guys are idoits do u wanna see the movie or what?

Nick: yea

Chris: might as well

Scene 3: Movies

Slasher movie going on\. Bill Nick and Chris sit and are glued to the movie when Allison walks by and sits next to Bill, bill looks over and instantly falls in love allison is the perfect girl or so he thinks

Nick: \(to Bill\) dude got a boner?

Bill: man shut up

Nick: Brotha please just look at them titties man shit

Bill: shut the fuck god

Nick: haha chill out

Movie ends they all get up to walk out allison drops her keys and bill picks them up and runs them to her she thanks him and they introduce themselves and exchange numbers

Chris: \(to nick\) you seeing that man

Nick: nope I was born without eyes

Chris: your suck a cocksmoker

Nick: least I don’t swallow

Chris: ok?

Bill walks back over to the guys and says lets go they start to drive home and talk

Nick: Bill that chick was grade A booty

Chris: Aman

Bill: her names Allison

Nick: why aint we seen her before?

Bill: guess shes new

Chris: guess so

Chris: get her #?

Bill: as a matter of fact yes I did

Nick: woah let me see

Bill: no thanks man u got plenty of other chicks

Nick: so whats one more?

Bill: fuck off man

Chris: calm down yall

Bill drops them off at Chris’s house and drives home happy as can be or so he thinks \(slick shoes Nows the time\) images of allison flashing the future looking great…\.\.

Scene 4: few days later bill runs into allison they talk and plan a date for later that night

Small restraunt in town

Bill: so how come ive never seen you before?

Allison: I just moved here from Weston

Bill: wheres that?

Allison: in Washington

Bill: oh cool

Allison: yea I guess

Bill: so what things are you into

Allison: music, movies, sports that kinda stuff

Bill: whats your favorite band?

Allison: slipknot and mudvane

Bill: oh \(sighs\) of course

Allison: what you don’t like them

Bill: umm I don’t care to much for guys who think its halloween everyday

Allison: oh don’t be that guy they are the most taltend guys ever

Bill: yea that’s why they have like 20 people in the band they might as well have a choir and an orchestra then theyd be fucking bitchin

Allison: alright so what are u into then

Bill: music, movies books, that kinda stuff

Allison: so what music do u like then

Bill: Owen, mineral, cursive, small brown bike, armor for sleep that kinda stuff

Allison: who?

Bill: figured u wouldn’t know of them theyre really good bands and no they don’t dress like clowns either

Allison lol oh

Bill: How old are you?

Allison: 18 and u?

Bill: same

Allison: so whats your fave movie?

Bill: that’s a tough one anything scary or depressing

Allison: why depressing?

Bill: I don’t know I just like being depressed it’s a beautiful thing

Allison: oh okay?

Bill: ill be right back I gotta use the rest room\.

Allison: alright

Bill walks to use the bathroom and allison sees a "Hott Waiter" and goes up and asks him for his \# which he gives to her, she then sits back down and bill returns

Allison: so how often do u have sex?

Bill: Excuse me?

Allison: I mean do u do it a lot?

Bill: ugh umm i…\. Ive never done it

Allsion: haha so you’re a virgin? No way how could you not do it?

Bill: I havent found the right person yet\.

Allison: oh I see im sorry I didn’t mean to insult u

Bill: its okay get that a lot…

Allison: from who?

Bill: My friends they give me shit all the time but I get use to it

Allison: so maybe u should find new friends

Bill: nah just cause they give me shit, doesn’t mean they don’t care about me u just gotta know em I guess

Allison: anyways Do you have a smoke?

Bill: I ugh don’t smoke

Allison: oh nevermind then

Bill looks at the clock its 1:30

Bill: well I gotta head home im pretty tired and I gotta be up at 6 to work with my dad

Allison: alright well when do u wanna hang out again

Bill: whenever you want\!\!

Allison: how about tomarrow

Bill: okay sounds good give me a call

Allison: ok see ya then

Bill: bye

Bill walks out and gets into his car has a huge smile on his face the happiest hes been in a long time turns on the car and throws in Slick shoes Now is the time\. He drives home with smile still on his face and images of allison flash across his mind

Fade 2 black

Scene 5: Next day Bill and Allison are together at Allison’s house watching a movie and allison moves into kiss bill and does and bill is shocked\.

Bill: wow wasn’t expecting that

Allison: not a bad kisser must of kissed a lot of chicks huh?

Bill: actually I havent ya know most girls think im a loser

Allison: well I don’t think you’re a loser

Bill: Thanks

Allison: Come on I gotta show you something

Allison takes bill to her room \(which is very clean and has posters of all the teeny bopper boys on the wall\.\)

Bill: damn your rooms clean

Allison: yea I hate it when my rooms dirty it makes me feel gross

Bill: you cant see my room then haha

Allison walks over to the radio on the wall and puts in a dashboard confessional cd and pushes play

Bill: wow I didn’t know you liked dashboard

Allison: of course I saw them on mtv ive been a fan since their first album the places you’ve come to fear the most

Bill: that’s actually their 2nd or 3rd record

Allison: Really? Are you sure?

Bill: yea pretty sure

Allison: well Carson daily from Trl said it was their first

Bill: \(mumbles\)I bet that fucker did

Allison: what?

Bill: I said your hair looks nice

Allison shuts the door and pushes bill to sit on the bed and starts making out with him, then starts taking off her shirt and bra\. She then moves down to take off bills pants and sucks his cock after that she take off her pants and they both undress totally

Bill: I don’t have a condom

Allison: I gotta it covered

Allison pulls out a condom and puts it on bill and the love scene occurs

Afterwards they get dressed and sit on the bed

Bill: that was the most amazing thing ive ever done felt shit that was awesome

Allison: yea it was something

Bill: so will you go out with me?

Allison: woah I don’t wanna rush into a relationship right away

Bill: huh? We just made love though

Allison: yes I know but I cant be in a realtionship right now

Bill: why not?

Allison: because I just got out of a 2 year relationship

Bill: well do u not like me then?

Allison: of course I like you lets just take this slow

Bill: ok that’s fine take all the time you need

Scene 6:

Nick: holy shit you got laid?

Chris: only buy his hand

Bill: no im serious guys I went over to her house and she was just all over me

Nick: I want details

Bill: no

Chris: was it good?

Bill: it was so amazing I was in heaven

Nick: yea I bet

Chris: she blow you?

Bill: yea she did

Nick c’mon tell us the details

Bill: nope

Chris: you cock smoker

Bill: sorry guys I don’t kiss and tell

Nick: shit kiss my ass

Bill: I’ve never felt like this, she’s the best thing that ever happened to me

Nick: Hello wake up Bill you’ve known her for like 3 days and she’s already fucked you, you don’t know weather or not shes the best thing that’s ever happened to you\.

Bill: oh I know she is I can just tell she’s the angel to my halo

Chris: fuckin pussy whipped already

Bill: not even close

Chris: hey did u give her the cripler?

Bill: the what?

Chris: the crippler or the shocker some people call it?

Bill: what is the crippler or shocker?

Nick: chris I don’t think he did it to her

Bill: what the hell is the crippler

Nick: you wanna tell him or should I?

Chris: go ahead

Nick: alright man next time your with allison and you guys decide to get all hot and naked, stick your first two fingers in the pink and then stick your pinky in the stink \(that’s how it works\)

Bill: you guys aint right

Chris: just try it chicks dig it

Bill: yea

Bills cell phone rings and its Allison they talk and then clips flash with bill and Allison together and they eventually go out and life is perfect right??

PRESENT:

Nick: So Bill we partying at Allison’s house tonight?

Bill: what? No

Chris: of course not, Billy bob Billy wants to get his little peter wet

Bill: don’t be jealous of the wang because it’ll put you to shame

Nick: you came up with that all on your own didn’t you?

Bill: yea I did it was good wasn’t it?

Nick: oh yea it was good, right up there with Christopher Lowell

Chris: what does Christopher Lowell have to with being good?

Nick: you idiot I was calling Bill gay

Bill: guys don’t be mad because I’m getting sum and your not

Nick: oh I’m getting plenty from your mom

Chris: yea and when Nicks in your mom’s pants, I’ve got your dad all tied up and oh do I teach him bad things

Bill: that’s just not right

Nick: ok Chris I think maybe you should sit in with Christopher Lowell because that was just too gay

Chris: oh stop it \(with a lisp\)

Scene 7: all this time Nick and allison have been flirting behind bills back and bill doesn’t realize it hes head over heels for allison and shes been cheating on him with his best friend

Nick: so what happens if he finds out

Allison: who

Nick: who do you think? Bill

Allison: oh so what, he doesn’t expect anything I give him some and hes happy hell never find out so don’t worry, besides hes away for the day he had construction up north with his dad

Nick: ok

Allison: itll be fine

Allison and Nick begin to undress and have mad sex

On the other hand bill got done early at work and stopped at the store to buy allison some roses\. He then heads to her house In the pouring rain\. He pulls in the drive way and knocks on the door, but no one answers\. so he walks in and sees the house dark and candles lit very romantic he thinks\. Oh shes gonna love this he says out loud and walks down to the hall to her room \(not paying any attention lost in his own world he doesn’t hear the sound of his precious girlfriend moaning and groaning as his best friend sticks it to her\)\. he walks in hey honey look what I …… \(he sees nick and allison naked and screwing\) Got

Allison: Oh my god bill whatre you doing here

Bill: I got outta work early wanted to surprise you but I guess im the one who gets the surprise

Nick: dude im so sorry

Bill: shut the fuck up don’t apologize just keep fucking her, u 2 deserve eachother,

oh yea try kissing her on the collar bone, she loves that\.

Allison: bill wait

Bill: what

Allison: im sorry I wanted to tell u I just couldn’t

Bill: you were my girl, and fuck Nick is…was my best friend, you were the only two people I thought would never let me down\.

Allison: so this is it? Is this the end

Bill: your goddamn right this is over you both can get hit by a freight train for all I care

Bill gets his his car and speeds off to his house he tells his mom whats happened

Mom: oh bill im so sorry

Bill: I trusted both of them

Mom: I don’t know what to say hunny ive never been in this position

Bill: I cant fucking belive this

Mom: you just gotta let it go move on and find some one better they say living well is the best revenge

Bill: you don’t understand I loved her soo much and even worse nick was my best friend GOD\!\!\!\!\!\!

Bill walks away and goes upstairs to his room and wigs out he rips everything off of his wall and destroys everything in his way he lays on his bed and starts balling his eyes out \(very emotional\) FATA \(autumns monologue\) playing\. He doses off to sleep for an hour or so then wakes up screaming and in tears

He grabs his keys and gets in his car not knowing where hes going just anywhere but here\. he finally decides to cruise over to Allison’s house and when he gets there he sees chris’s car there so he parks away from her house and peeks in the window only to see allison nick and chris playing cards and having a blast\.

Chris: damnit Nick that was my card

Nick: shit you wish

Chris: so whats taking Bill so long? He was suppose to be here hours ago

Nick and Allison look at eachother and quickly Allison says

Allison: I don’t know maybe he didn’t feel good or something

Chris: he wouldve called though

Allison: yea I know that is weird ill go call him right now

She gets up and gets the phone and goes into the back bedroom pretends to dial and talkin to bill

Allison: I just got off the phone with him I guess hes not coming tonight he had a long day and night with his dad so hes staying home\.

Chris: that’s not like bill?

Nick: well maybe he had a bad day

Chris: yea could be

Bill is out raged by this he gets back into his car and puts the pedal to the metal\. That’s where you see the opening scene he hits a tree going over a 100 mph and his head smashes hard against the steering wheel causing him to go in a coma\.

Cut scene of flashing lights the paramedics arrive and you see blood all over the car and them putting bill the ambulance\. His parents arrive and ask whats going on and flipping out asking if bills alright\. Bills mom rides in the ambulance while his dad follows in the car\.

Doctor: Mr\. And Mrs\. Hoffamn

Mr&Mrs\.: yes

Doctor: Im afraid I have some very bad news

Mom: oh god what

Doc: your sons in a very bad coma and we don’t know if hes going to come out and if he does I don’t know whats going to happen hes suffered a lot of blood loss and brain damage

Dad: oh no

Mom: this is all that girls fault

Dad: calm down hun

Mom: no im not going to calm down that bitch is why hes in this mess

Just then Nick and chris show up

Nick: is he alright?

Chris: is he alright?

Mom: Nick you have a lot of guts showing up here

Nick: I know and im sorry but is he alright?

Dad: what do you care

Mom: its your fault hes here

Nick: what??

Mom: if you wouldn’t have slept with that bitch none of this mess wouldve happened

Nick: you know what fuck you guys, I just wanted to know how he was

Mom: he’ll be better with out you here

Nick exits and slams the door

Chris: so how is he

Dad: not good

Mom: hes in a coma and hes suffered major brain damage\.

Chris: oh that’s bad ill be right back I’ve got to go take care of something\.

Chris leaves and catches up with nick and pushes him

Chris: you slept with Allison?

Nick: yea but its not that big of deal

Chris: what do you mean its not that big of a deal, Michelles right \(bills mom\)you are the reason bills in there

Nick: that’s bull shit he’s in there because he was going to fast and went off the road it was an accident

Chris: no that’s bull shit, that was his girl and your suppose to be his best friend he wouldve done anything for you\. And you know damn well he wouldve never done that to you, you fucking dick

Nick: you know what just shut the fuck up this isnt your problem

Chris: it is now

Chris pushes Nick and they get into a huge fight nick ends up breaking Chris’s jaw and that’s the end of their friendship\.

Chris walks back into the hospital with his broken jaw, meanwhile the doctor is still going over Bills Status, they notice Chris stumbling in with his jaw slanted

Doc: What happened son?

Dad: you all right Chris

Chris: me an ick got in a figh

Mom: some day that little shit is gonna get what he deserves

Doc: ill get some one to look at you, stay right here

Chris: I ain gon oh ere

Chris gets treated for his jaw, the hoffman family goes in where bill is……\.

3 months later

Ken: hun just calm down everythings going to work out just fine\.

Michelle: you always say that Ken, how can you be sure

Ken: I have lots of Hope

Michelle: Hope? That word is useless There is no Hope in this world

Ken: yes there is\. If no one had hope this world would be pointless

Michelle: well ken to be honest I have no hope for us in the future\.

Ken: what, what’d you mean by that

Michelle: I want a divorce

Ken: wha why?

Michelle: I just cant take it anymore

Ken: babe ill do anything we have to support bill on this

Michelle: Ken, bill is never going to wake up

Ken: so that’s it? Your just going to give up? Your just going to throw everything away?

Michelle: im sorry

She walks out of the hospital room, ken is left behind with his hands on his face

Days go by then weeks then months and a lot has changed chris moved out and got an apartment just down the street from bills house, nick moved in with Allison and worse of all his parents split up 4 months after the accident\. His dad wont move on but his mom already has\.

Scene 8: 1 year later bill wakes from his coma screaming

Bill: AHH\!\!\!\!\!

The nurses come running and are shocked to see bill sitting up

Bye this time bill has a small beard and looks pretty shitty

Nurse: are you all right?

Bill: theyre coming\!

Nurse: who

Bill: I don’t know

The hospitals called bills rents and they show up immediately and are also in shock seeing him sit up

Mom: Bill oh my god how are you

Bill: hey mom what happened why am I here

Dad: you don’t remember?

Bill: I don’t remember much my head hurts so bad

Bill: where’s Allison and nick and Chris?

Mom: I don’t know

Bill: I want to see them why am In the hospital what happened?

Mom: son you’ve been in a coma for over a year

Bill: What?\!?\! How?

Bills dad pulls his mom outta the way and starts talking to her\. Bill notices another guy standing by the corner of the room, hes not a doctor or anything\.

Dad: maybe it’s a good idea we don’t tell him whats happened yet just let it come back whenever hell understand

Mom: no he wont understand, what if he never remembers?

Dad: well lets just drop it for now and just tell him he got in an accident

Mom: you tell him then

Dad: alright I will

The guy walks over to his mom and asks her for her keys to get something out of the car bills dad steps out of the way and gives bill a sad look\. Bill looks puzzled at all three of the people and then realizes that his dads wearing his wedding ring and that his mothers not\.

After this long pause of confusion bill gets up and walks to the window upset by this but he speaks nothing

Mom: Bill\!\! What are you doing you need to get back in bed and rest

Bill: ive rested long enough

Dad: son you really should get some rest

Bill: dad im fine really my head just hurts a little

Bill: who was that other guy

Mom: bill get back in that bed and rest

Bill: no god damn it who the hell is that guy

Dad: that’s your moms new boyfriend

Bill: what

Mom: damn it ken I thought we wernt going to discuss this until bill was better

Dad: I wasn’t going to lie to him besides you’re the one who asked for the divorce I don’t see how I owe you anything

Mom: did I say you owed me anything

Dad: you know what just shut up

During the argument bill is still facing out the window and when he turns around his head is bleeding really bad and he faints

Mom: Nurse\!\! Nurse\!\! Some one help me

Two doctors come running to see what the commotion is all about and they pick up bill and put him on the bed and clean up his head

Dad: doc is he going to be alright?

Doc: I don’t know he shouldn’t have even been out of bed

Dad: he said he was fine

Doc: well make sure he stays there from now on

Dad: okay

Doc: this is very weird

Dad: what is?

Doc: that wound in his head shouldve healed months ago

Dad: it hasn’t?

Doc: it has a little but not much as you can see

Dad: so what do we do?

Doc: weve done all we can bill just has to be careful\. If he bumps his head one time he may be dead

Scene 9: were inside of bills dreams we see Allison nick and Chris all together having a good time all playing poker around a table at Allison’s house\. Bill gets up and walks into the bathroom and looks in the mirror and sees cuts and blood all over his face he screams…\.this wakes him from his dream and he screams yet again

Bill: AHH\!\!

He sees that the room is dark and that it must be late and his rents must’ve stepped out\. so he sits up in his bed and gets up to walk outside of his room and realizes that the entire hospital has been deserted\. so he keeps walking down the hall and walks outside only to find dead bodies everywhere piled up like a bunch of logs\. He flips out and runs back inside and runs right into a doctor

Doc: Son whatre u doing

Bill: ou out out ssss side people dead people

Doc: kid theres no dead people out side

Bill: bullshit I just saw all of them piled up to the sky

Doc: alright kid lets go outside and ill show you

Bill: youll see

They both walk outside and to bills surprise theres no dead bodies piled up everything is normal

Bill: but I just saw all those people what happened to them\. I swear that they were just here\.

Doc: You need to go back in and rest

Bill: that’s all ive been doing is resting I don’t need anymore fucking rest I know what I saw\.

Doc: calm down son ill go get your parents

Bills sits down on a bench and puts his hands on his face and his elbows on his knees

Bill: what the hell is going on

Dad: bill are you okay?

Bill: yea im fine why the hell cant I remember anything? What happened where are all my friends?

Dad: I told you, you hit a tree head on and fell in a coma

Bill: I got that part, where are my friends and why cant I remember much?

Dad: I don’t know kid the doctors say the coma will make u not remember some stuff bull you’ll slowly regain all of it back

Bill: I want to go home

Dad: well lets get you checked out then

Scene 10: Bill gets in his room and sees its all fucked up he walks over and picks up a picture of Allison that’s half ripped and he smiles and is trying to figure out who did this and why

As he looks around he gets small flashbacks of the accident but nothing he could comprehend just the rain and that it was black out and that he was driving really fast\.

Bill puts everything in his room back together, during this he remembers a few more things like him and Allison making love and being happy together\.

Screen shot of the room back to normal and exactly how it use to be

The next day Bill rides his bike to Allisons & knocks on the door\. He hears a small voice almost childlike but thinks nothing of it\.

Allison: Hold on ill be right there \(she opens the door\) oh my god bill, how are you?

Bill: im really good and you?

Allison: im alright

Bill: wow I couldn’t wait to see you, why didn’t you visit me in the hospital?

Allison: Because I thought y

Just then chris drives by and stops his truck and yells

Chris: bill\!\! Hey is that you bill?

Bill: he turns to allison and says " ill be right back" \(walks over to chris\)

Chris: when did you get out of the hospital?

Bill: I got out last night and I came out of the coma 2 days ago

Chris: oh, well im glad your back buddy ive missed ya

Bill: how come you guys never came to visit me?

Chris: I did almost every day but the past 3 days I was in Detroit working\.

Bill: oh im glad buddy thanks it means a lot

Chris: dude it was no problem im glad u snapped out of it ive been worried

\(Allison sneaks out and drives off without bill noticing\.\)

Bill: so what happened? I mean how did I get in an accident?

Chris: are you saying you don’t remember?

Bill: remember what?

Chris: oh man that accident mustve messed you up pretty bad

Bill: why tell me what happened

Chris: I cant its not my place to tell you

Bill: your suppose to be one of my best friends why cant you tell me

Chris: I just cant

Bill: wheres Nick

Chris: I don’t know

Bill: shit you two were joined at the hips what do you mean you don’t know

Chris: bill a lot has happened since your accident and its probably best that you don’t remember

Bill: best for who

Chris: best for you, ive got to get going though give me a call a later ok?

Bill: alright man

Bill walks back over to Allisons house and knocks on the door again but this time no one answers he looks over to the car and its gone

Bill: Damn

He rides his bike home and walks in the house and sees his dad is on the phone with tears pouring out

Bill: dad whats going on

Dad: I got some bad news kid

Bill: what?

Dad: your, your mothers been shot \(weeping\) she was at the bank and oh god

Bill:………\. Tears forming

Dad: there was a robbery that went wrong I don’t know exactly how it happened I just know she was shot that bastard shot her right in the chest she bled to death oh god im sorry son\. \(Hugs bill\)

they both start crying and bills head starts to ache so bad he collapses to his knees his dad pulls him up a notices hes bleeding from his head again

Dad: shit bill your bleeding again I don’t understand that wound should have healed months ago

Bill: it hasn’t, something’s not right dad, I don’t understand whats going on im so confused I cant take this anymore, mom just died Nick and Allison wont talk 2 me\.

Dad: I know son you just have to not think about it

Bill: how can I not think of it? my mom just fucking died shes fucking DEAD\!\! How am I suppose to deal with this shit\. Ive got more problems than a fucking math book

Dad: what shit?

Bill: never mind

Bill walks away and goes upstairs and lays down and cries himself to sleep

Fade 2 black

Next scene shows bill running after Allison at a park in town he chases her down and kisses her and they make out and everything is perfect in his mind

He wakes up and sees that his room is covered in blood everything is just red he freaks out and starts yelling, his dad comes upstairs to investigate and see what hes yelling for

Dad: whats a matter

Bill: what do you mean what the matter cant you see

Dad: see what

Bill: the walls

Dad: yea whats wrong with your walls

Bill: the blood its everywhere, you don’t see it?

Dad: son I think you mustve had a nightmare

Bill: bull shit your standing in it right now

His dad looks down and the floor is normal no sign of blood

Dad: bill theres no blood here

Bill: but its all over

Slowly the blood starts fading away until only a trail is left leading out and down the stairs

Dad: bill are you going to be alright?

Bill: I don’t know? I don’t understand whats happening

Dad: bill its time you and I have a talk

Bill: about what

Dad: about whats been going on

Bill: ok?

Dad: you see when you had your accident you hit your head so hard that its amazing your not dead and that you even know who I am, part of your brain is damaged and that could be the cause of some of the stress you’ve been having

Bill: but im okay I just cant explain some things

Dad: I think its time

The phone rings and rings, bill picks it up and its just a deadline\. He hangs the phone up and follows the trail of blood out of his room, then down his stairs through the kitchen and out the back door\. There he follows the trail from the backdoor then he follows it to the back of the garage there he sees a blue tarp with blood leaking from it\. He lifts the tarp and sees his old car smashed like a crumpled piece of paper\. He looks at the steering wheel and notices the crack in it and that’s where all the blood was coming from bill leans in and touches the steering wheel and goes nuts\. His head feels like its going to explode and he falls to his knees and feels the blood coming from his head this time for real\.

Dad: bill you alright?

Bill: I don’t know my head hurts again

Dad: yea its bleeding again

Bill: do you think I’m going nuts

Dad: no you’ve had it rough, everything will be fine I promise

Bill: I hope so, I miss mom

Dad: me to

Scene 12: Bill goes to Chris’s house and they sit at the coffee table and drink some pop and just catch up on stuff

Bill: so when’s the last time you saw nick?

Chris: the night of your accident

Bill: really? Why?

Chris: I told you we weren’t getting into that

Bill: why? What’s it gonna hurt

Chris: you\. Listen I know you’ve been through a bad time and im really sorry about your mom but if I had any advice for you it would be to get the hell out of this town\.

Bill: what happened to us Chris? We were like brothers you, nick, and I? I miss it

Chris: me too, man me to

Bill: so have you talked to Allison latley?

Chris: nope

Bill: I keep trying to call her but she never answers the phone

Chris: bill its been a year, shes moved on

Bill: well I figured but she can at least talk to me maybe we can work it back out

Chris: don’t go near that fucking bitch man shes fucking evil

Bill: what? How can you say that your suppose to be my best friend you know how much I love her don’t be a dick

Chris: im just telling you straight up that shes a slut

Bill: Fuck you\!\! I don’t need your shit

Bill walks out the door and gets on his skateboard and skates off\.

Next scene: Bills at the city park sitting on a swing sitting depressed, confused, and lost\. He tries to replay the night of the accident and remembers he had to work that day and remembers he also stopped by the store to buy flowers he remembers rain right before his accident but it wasn’t raining when he got the flowers\. Puzzled he gets up and slowly he regains his memory frame by frame\. Work, then leaving early to come home and surprise Allison, he stops at the gas station and gets a dozen roses then he gets half way to Allisons house and it starts to rain\. He finally arrives at Allisons and is so excited to see her he runs in the house and notices candles lit everywhere\. He remembers walking down that hall and into the bedroom and suddenly all is to clear he remembers everything the yelling and screaming, getting into the car, speeding and losing control\.

Bill runs and runs and runs straight to Allison’s house and beats on the door till Allison opens up

Allison: Bill hi im surprise to see you so late

Bill: how could you do it?

Allison: do what

Bill: don’t play stupid I know I remember everything now, how could you do that to me with my best friend I loved you so much

Allison: Bill I didn’t love you im sorry, I cant take it back

Bill: why didn’t you just tell me you wernt in love with me

Allison: because I didn’t know what love was, to me its just a four letter word

Bill: tears forming I figured

Man: babe whos there

Allison: You better go

Bill: yea I guess I better

Just then some guy opens the door holding a little baby girl, bill looks back and sees its Nick

Nick: Holy shit is that you bill

Bill: the one and only

Nick: what brought you to this side of town

Bill: I wanted answers

Nick: look man im sorry

Bill: don’t bother save your apologies for some one who cares

Nick: I never wanted it to be this way but she didn’t love you

Bill: Well fuck all of you, you can all rot in hell for all I care

Nick: Bill im sorry

Bill: you know theres only one thing stopping me from coming up to that porch and knocking you the fuck out, you want to know what that is,

Nick: what

Bill: My heart

Bill turns back around and walks away his left eye goes blind from the blood dripping into it from his head\.

Next scene: Bill walks to Chris’s house to apologize he knocks on the door

Bill: Chris u there its me bill… hey man open up I’m sorry, you were right about Allison and Nick I remember everything that happened\. I’m sorry I doubted u please open up\.\(he looks at the drive way his trucks there\) listen I know your in there just open up the door\.

Bill opens the door and looks around he eventually walks up the stairs as he’s going up he sees Chris in a chair with his head down and blood is running down the steps he runs up to Chris and sees that its too late, he’s cut his wrists\.

Bill: No God No\!\! \(screams\) not you I cant lose you to he grabs chris and starts crying and hugging him\. He dials 911 and sees the note above the phone

I cant take this anymore I have no friends I have no family I have no one

Im sorry Bill for saying those things I said I should’ve been a better friend

I hope you can find room in your heart to forgive me this is all my fault

No one cares no one wants to deal with my problems if only theyd pay

More attention if only everyone took more time out of their day to care for

The ones they love, even the ones they don’t love Im sorry it had to come to this

But I saw no other way out I have no one I love you Bill you were my best and only friend im sorry I fucked it up I love you like a brother

Chris

Bill: What have I done

What have I done

What have I done

What have I done

Slowly all the things I loved was destroyed and taken from me, my heart was gone\. I could never love anyone again\. I would never love anyone again\. After Chris’s funeral I promised myself I would move on and that I would never look back, and to this day I can honestly say that ive never followed up on that promise\. There isnt a day that goes by where I don’t think of my mom, of Chris, of Nick and Allison\. I wish I never met Allison\. I wish I was never there at the movies that night\. I wish she wouldve stayed in Washington\. Its been 5 years since they moved me from Brayton\. Its been 5 years since the last time ive seen day light\. They say im crazy\. What do you think?

Trailer

It was august 22nd and the guys and I had nothing to but sit around in that old restaurant and make fun of each other\. Life was great we had everything 3 best friends could ask for\. Until she walked in… after that, things got messed up friendship was lost, betrayal occurred, and hate was replaced by love\. I don’t remember what happened that summer but I know it changed all our lives forever\.\. she would change all our lives forever\.\. please god help me understand what happened\.

9:44 PM
