# Jan 17, 2018

# 12:17 AM

Here’s the thing about life. You can’t make anyone see or believe something until they are ready and willing to see it themselves. You can tell someone how they’re going down the wrong path and that there is a better way, you could even provide proof and written facts but until that person is willing to see and accept that, your words are just falling on deaf ears. We all want to justify our actions for whether right or wrong, but there is and will always be a better way to live, even if that opportunity doesn’t come until months later. I know I didn’t want to see the direction in which I was going because I was letting pain and anger take the wheel and I just sat back on cruise control. So hell bent by my need to justify that pain by revenge that I couldn’t see the path of destruction I would be leaving behind me. When somebody hurts you in the worst way possible it doesn’t matter what you do, you will never get even because you will never be able to inflict that pain and emotion back onto that person the same way. You could potentially destroy that persons life and career by exposing their true colors but at the end of the day is that your job? Are you really willing to sacrifice more of your life just to get even? I wish I could justify my actions and say that it was worth it but in the end I only lost more than where I had began. After Trevor died my eyes finally opened to what was in front of me. I will not be remember as someone who was so full of anger and misery. Everything in life is a choice and most of us don’t want to accept that fact, we want to point fingers and blame anyone and everyone else, myself included sometimes. The only thing you change is yourself, you cannot nor should not ever try and change someone else even if it’s for the better, your just wasting your time and that only leads to resentment later on. It’s been the worst 9 months I’ve ever lived through, but I’ve also learned more about myself and life than ever before. There is always a better way, and there is a choice in everything you do. The better way will never be the easy way. But it will always be worth it

Dustin Smith, January 17, 2018 at 12:17AM

12:17 AM
