# Nov 1, 2020

# 4:54 PM

Status

Listen a lot has happened in the last few days. I've been to places mentally that I don't like to go but I had to go there to be able to get the fuck out of bed every day. I feel like I'm getting to that point of not giving a fuck and I want to keep giving a fuck.

I fear that I will never make it out of my mom's with this job and with my license situation. I can't move forward without some kind of miracle or some outside help. I'm not putting that outside help on you either. I'll never make you carry my weight ever again.

I know you are cursed with not being able to forget anything, especially the bad things, I guess I'm cursed with being able to forget a lot of things or maybe I'm not forgetting them but actually letting those wounds heal because I choose to live through those things instead of hiding them or running from them. I don't know.

I never wanted to lose you and I never wanted you to lose yourself. We have been through so much together, more than most people have their entire lives, both good and bad. I don't see a way of us getting out of our situations without something life changing or altering happening and the only conclusion or solution I have is to let you go. Despite all my feelings, all my love, how sick it makes me to not be with you, I know that I am the only one who can break us out of this loop so you can be the person and the mother you really want to be.

I don't want to let you go Stevie. I told you back when we first got together that I just knew you were it for me. There's nobody after you and I mean it now just as I did then, if not more. I want you to be able to have a better life for yourself and for the girls and I know the only way that is possible is to be able to have a clean slate and fresh start with someone whom you can build a new life with.

All I am or have become to you is either a reminder of how much I hurt you back than and how it's my fault I made you who you are now or I'm just going to be a constant reminder of all of your mistakes and you will never escape this cycle of doom. I don't see any happy endings for myself because this isn't what I want but I'm finally putting the wants and needs of you and the children before my own for once.

I don't know how we're going to get through this at all, I can't hardly function as it is, but I do know that every time the dust settles, even after only a few days. That law of attraction goes into full effect and it keeps pulling us back in. I would continue this loop forever if It means that every few months I get to see you and be with you for just one more day over and over but I have to stop being so selfish of what I want. We are both more than our mistakes and I would do anything and everything thing I could to right my wrongs for you.

I'm not going to play it off like I'm not hurt for the things that's happened the last few months, especially when I've been trying to go 💯 on the fact that I just wanted you to be real and be honest with me regardless of my feelings. Maybe I could have found a way to save us if I knew how you really felt about me and what you really felt about Tyler. You are a good person stevie, who makes mistakes just like everyone else. And I know after you got with Tyler you thought you were doing the right thing because it was different and you didn't want to throw our marriage away for something that wasn't real and concrete in your soul. I also know you hated the way you went about things and kept coming back to repair them so you could feel like you were doing the right thing. I don't ever want to be someone you want for any other reason accept because that's what you really want. None of that because it was familiar and comfortable shit, or you felt bad or guilty for me. Fuck that, all that shit did was fuck me up even more cause it just made me question how you felt about me even more.

I don't know where to go or what to do anymore all I know is I have to find any and every way to stay out of your life and leave you alone so you can move on and be happy

4:54 PM

# 5:28 PM

Ok

I'm not really sure how to start this conversation or what the right words are to put it the best way possible so I guess I'm just gonna be blunt and up front.

I know you hate the situation you're in and you're crawling out of your skin, but I'm completely useless and helpless to you right now if things were to go south at the moment.

I understand, you need him to help

Get the kids off the bus and for bills and shit, I know that you hate how and where you've ended up and I understand that you have to fake it until you figure out the best way to go about the situation.

I also know theres no way of faking it and continuing to get him to help you without giving him what he wants from you. Your google photos from the stevielong account is still linked to my google photos account and today i went through the last two years of your life with him and with me and you know what I noticed right away? That when you are with him you never once smiled or lit up the camera the way you did when you were with me. Even through all the kate nights and fights, i know you care and love me.

I don't want you to worry about me, I'm gonna be fine, I need to stay focused on getting out of here and getting my license.

5:28 PM
