# Oct 18, 2020

# 2:14 PM

The letters we'll never send

At this point in life I'm a 35 year old single father of 3 beautiful children. Currently trying to rebuild my life after a heartbreaking divorce and a meth addiction. There are so many reasons why I am where I am, some are simply because of misfortune and things out of my control but most were honestly my fault.

At a young age we develop certain senses of wrong and right, good and bad and so on. My life has always been run by emotions, my moods and my choices always stem from whatever emotion I am feeling at those times.

In 2008 I was diagnosed with ADHD and put on Adderall by 2012 I was on the maximum dosage of 60 mg a day. That drug was my lifeline, it made me into a completely different person, it made me dive head first into my passion of creating music and thrive in every work environment I was in. It got me promoted to jobs I never would have been interested in before, I was making money I had never been able to make previously, but it came with a price. The biggest price of them all. It cost me my wife, my children and my friend's. I put all my time and effort into things that really didn't matter at the end of the day, all my attention went to myself and how long can you neglect the people that love and care about you before they give up on you? 6 years was my answer to that. 6 years of neglect to my then wife and to my son and my daughter's, to my friends and family members. I was a recluse. A machine, a robot working only for myself and when everything finally came crashing down, the last person I wnted to blame was myself. I wanted to be angry at everyone else but myself, I wanted crucify those closest, mostly my ex wife. I know she tried to get me to see where I was going wrong and what I was doing wrong. How I was lacking in being a boyfriend, than in being a husband and finally in being a father.

I care so deeply about people yet I lack so much in showing it.

2:14 PM

# 2:15 PM

Endings are hard, life changing, sometimes life ending, I think it's safe to say I'll never be the same person I was before 2017. Dreams were shattered, love was broken, hope was lost. That fear of monsters being real as a child came to life only those monsters never came from under the bed or out of the closet, they disguised themselves in human form. They became the reason I never slept, they got in my head and made me question my self worth, they made me believe I would never be anything and I'd never be happy again. They made me question my own life every day until I started becoming one of them myself. My whole life I lived by a set of standards and morals so that I would never cross over to the dark side. I had boundaries, lines that I would never cross to keep me safe from being the next Anakin Skywalker and now I understand exactly why he became Darth Vader because when people you love fuck you up and show you a side of themselves and life that you never thought were real, it creates a catastrophic chain of events inside your belief syste and in the foundation you've built your life upon. Love turned into pain, pain turned into hate and hate turned into feeling nothing. What I've learned is that Hate is not the greatest negative emotion, feeling nothing is, because if you hate something it's for a reason, a purpose, but to feel nothing and do things that hurt people for no reason, for no purpose, you can really fuck the world up and far too many of us feel nothing anymore. For a long time I balanced myself on all the lines that I swore I would never cross and than one by one I didn't care anymore and after every line I crossed that structure and foundation of who I once was started caving in. Wall after wall, floor after floor until it buried me underneath it and it wasn't until the basement collapsed that I realized there is no rock bottom, there's no bottom at all to the holes we dig for ourselves, it's never ending and you can just keep going until the consequences of your actions and choices catch up to you and either kill you or mentally impair you

2:15 PM

# 2:15 PM

Passenger

One thing I've come to realize the most is that our inner demons aren't there to hurt us, they're there to hurt all the people that love us, they take them out one by one until it's just you and them and then they become you. I see it all around me, even in myself. So much darkness, so much anger, so much misunderstanding and all that does is bring those demons to life. They are awaken from hibernation by your surroundings, by the trauma, the environment, anxiety, bad relationships, anything that is negative. You don't have to come from a broken home, you don't have to be abused as a child, they don't just come out because of your childhood, I think that a lot of them probably stem from your childhood but they thrive more in your adulthood because you no longer have that innocence you had as a child to protect you. We are all born with the sense of wrong and right and the ability to be good or bad. It all comes down to a choice, a line drawn between the light and the darkness and once you cross that line you better distance your self from everyone who cares about you because you've just become a ticking time bomb to all of them, but of course it's too late for that cause that good part of you is now permanently in the passenger seat while your demons come to life.

2:15 PM

# 2:18 PM

You're the only one who has a key to my heart and You have to either use it to come back where you belong or return it to me so that I may give it so someone else, but you can no longer leave the home I built inside of me for you and take the key with you. We either rebuild a life together or you forever vacate yourself from me there is no more in between. I need the key back to your heart or I need closure

2:18 PM
