# Oct 31, 2020

# 3:22 PM

The letters we'll never send

At this point in life I'm a 35 year old single father of 3 beautiful children. Currently trying to rebuild my life after a heartbreaking divorce and a meth addiction. There are so many reasons why I am where I am, some are simply because of misfortune and things out of my control but most were honestly my fault.

At a young age we develop certain senses of wrong and right, good and bad and so on. My life has always been run by emotions, my moods and my choices always stem from whatever emotion I am feeling at those times.

In 2008 I was diagnosed with ADHD and put on Adderall by 2012 I was on the maximum dosage of 60 mg a day. That drug was my lifeline, it made me into a completely different person, it made me dive head first into my passion of creating music and thrive in every work environment I was in. It got me promoted to jobs I never would have been interested in before, I was making money I had never been able to make previously, but it came with a price. The biggest price of them all. It cost me my wife, my children and my friend's. I put all my time and effort into things that really didn't matter at the end of the day, all my attention went to myself and how long can you neglect the people that love and care about you before they give up on you? 6 years was my answer to that. 6 years of neglect to my then wife and to my son and my daughter's, to my friends and family members. I was a recluse. A machine, a robot working only for myself and when everything finally came crashing down, the last person I wnted to blame was myself. I wanted to be angry at everyone else but myself, I wanted crucify those closest, mostly my ex wife. I know she tried to get me to see where I was going wrong and what I was doing wrong. How I was lacking in being a boyfriend, than in being a husband and finally in being a father.

I care so deeply about people yet I lack so much in showing it.

3:22 PM

# 3:30 PM

Decrescendo

Endings are hard, life changing, sometimes life ending, I think it's safe to say I'll never be the same person I was before 2017. Dreams were shattered, love was broken, hope was lost. That fear of monsters being real as a child came to life only those monsters never came from under the bed or out of the closet, they disguised themselves in human form. They became the reason I never slept, they got in my head and made me question my self worth, they made me believe I would never be anything and I'd never be happy again. They made me question my own life every day until I started becoming one of them myself. My whole life I lived by a set of standards and morals so that I would never cross over to the dark side. I had boundaries, lines that I would never cross to keep me safe from being the next Anakin Skywalker and now I understand exactly why he became Darth Vader because when people you love fuck you up and show you a side of themselves and life that you never thought were real, it creates a catastrophic chain of events inside your belief syste and in the foundation you've built your life upon. Love turned into pain, pain turned into hate and hate turned into feeling nothing. What I've learned is that Hate is not the greatest negative emotion, feeling nothing is, because if you hate something it's for a reason, a purpose, but to feel nothing and do things that hurt people for no reason, for no purpose, you can really fuck the world up and far too many of us feel nothing anymore. For a long time I balanced myself on all the lines that I swore I would never cross and than one by one I didn't care anymore and after every line I crossed that structure and foundation of who I once was started caving in. Wall after wall, floor after floor until it buried me underneath it and it wasn't until the basement collapsed that I realized there is no rock bottom, there's no bottom at all to the holes we dig for ourselves, it's never ending and you can just keep going until the consequences of your actions and choices catch up to you and either kill you or mentally impair you

3:30 PM

# 3:31 PM

Passenger

One thing I've come to realize the most is that our inner demons aren't there to hurt us, they're there to hurt all the people that love us, they take them out one by one until it's just you and them and then they become you. I see it all around me, even in myself. So much darkness, so much anger, so much misunderstanding and all that does is bring those demons to life. They are awaken from hibernation by your surroundings, by the trauma, the environment, anxiety, bad relationships, anything that is negative. You don't have to come from a broken home, you don't have to be abused as a child, they don't just come out because of your childhood, I think that a lot of them probably stem from your childhood but they thrive more in your adulthood because you no longer have that innocence you had as a child to protect you. We are all born with the sense of wrong and right and the ability to be good or bad. It all comes down to a choice, a line drawn between the light and the darkness and once you cross that line you better distance your self from everyone who cares about you because you've just become a ticking time bomb to all of them, but of course it's too late for that cause that good part of you is now permanently in the passenger seat while your demons come to life.

3:31 PM

# 4:21 PM

Progress

I started to write you a book but I don't need to anymore for the first time in eight years you and I are on the same exact page and I couldn't be any more fucking proud of you for finally coming forward and telling me the truth so that I could be free of this hell we have been in. I never would have chased you had I known you truly didn't want me but we are good. As for Tyler I don't ever have to forgive him and he will always be something that I will not say in this message because I know it's disrespectful towards you but I am never going to cause drama between you two I will let you to be as happy or as miserable as you guys want to be and by the end of this weekend I am cutting ties with all of your family and not like on a some fuck shit but to remind them that you are their family and their sister it doesn't matter what you choose or who you choose to be with they need to support you and only you and that there's no hard feelings on anybody's side. I'm not going to give you a single reason to ever come at me as a reason why shit didn't work out this time around. I got nothing but love for your family. And nothing but respect for you finally owning your shit. I have no regrets Stevie, I made mistakes, and I became a better person but the fact that you didn't want me and pretended that was brought the worst out of me. I hope you never ever put anybody through that ever again because had this gone any further in a negative direction I have no doubt in my mind I would have killed all of us just to be free of this curse. Thank you for setting me free I mean that shit you will not hear from me again

4:21 PM

# 4:28 PM

Question Mark

Listen, it's not very often I ask anyone to take a few seconds and just listen to what I have to say, (cause in retrospect, I am pretty insignificant,) but every so often I unlock what I like to call *life achievements*

You're going to get hurt many times throughout your life, sometimes for unexplained reasons, sometimes because certain people enjoy seeing you hurt, but whatever the reason is or may be, we all do the same thing from a very young age. We build a defense system and put up walls to prevent others from hurting us anymore than we've already been hurt. (Is everyone still following and on the same page with me here?) Now this is where most of us fuck up, not because we put up giant walls and keep upgrading the security system. (I agree that to an extent we all need this system in place to protect us.) Here's the issue, how many people out there know what a firewall is and how to actually use it? A firewall is exactly the type of defense system we install in ourselves, it's there to protect us from incoming threats and to regulate us from sending too much of ourselves to the wrong people. I have found that the majority of us tend to stick to the default setting though and all of you default settings peeps out there is what's fucking everyone's love life up

4:28 PM

# 4:28 PM

Damn

You just don't get it and that's ok, I have finally come to terms that we are two different people and that we do not have, nor share the same interests in life anymore. You have left me to struggle in all of my worst moments and chose a toxic environment that was far worse than ours ever was over me Every time. I'm sorry but there is no excuse, the kids would have had a roof over their heads, if you would have just stuck it out at my mom's the first 4 times we could have saved up and moved again but you ran like you always do and I'm tired of chasing after you begging you to love me when you don't even know what love is. I think Tyler's version of love is something you relate to more than my version. I'm not trying to put you down and be mean but I am fucking angry and I deserve to be angry at you. I should have moved on after the apartment, you could never do shit the right way and you still can't. I'm tired of being the only one who wants to change and see things in a different perspective. You have always stayed true to you and your own beliefs even when those beliefs had faults. I gave up everything I stood for that you did not like just cause I loved you and felt like we had to compromise and change things for each other but you never changed, you stayed the same and put all the blame on me until I felt so worthless I wanted to die and then you found Tyler and you fucking killed me Stevie. The worst part is you still don't give a fuck about me and you don't have the fucking balls to say it which says a lot about who you are. I realized that I am so insignificant to you that you can't take 2 seconds out of your busy day to just say hi without me having to do it first. I also realized there are people out there who want to drop everything they're doing just to talk to me and wanna know how my day is. Regardless of how stressful or shitty their situation is and what's going on in their lives, ya know believe it or not some people have it way worse than you and me and they still wanna try and give me their time while I'm out here trying to give you mine and you don't want it??? Come on I have come to accept that we will never be the same again. You hurt me in ways I would never hurt you and you made me feel so small and worthless every time you did it. I can't let that shit go anymore, I can't pretend or act like I don't care that you don't care about me anymore. I'm good being alone, it's better than being used and being lied to. All I wanted was the truth and I'll never get it from you anymore. I'm not sure you even remember what being honest is like. I will always love you and I will always be angry at you for giving up on me and choosing that piece of shit over me 9 times. 9 fucking times that's not an accident or a mistake it's a choice. I hope you still find peace and happiness and I don't really care if you don't want the same for me, cause you obviously never wanted me to be happy in the first place.

4:28 PM

# 5:00 PM
# No Villains

If you were to write your life story, how many of you could say that you didn't have a single villian or negative person in it?

Most of us have at least one person who damaged or broke us in some way that we were never the same afterwards\.

Those people were the turning point in whether we chose to hurt others as they did to us

or if we realized, we would never want the people we love,  to feel the way all the people that fucked us up did

By the time my story is finished, I won't have a single villain in it because the world has enough shitty people and every person that has ever hurt me, defined me and made me into a better person each time\.

So they are not villians, they are just supporting actors and actresses who helped me see a better world and live without negativity\.

The best way to take away a villains superpower, is to erase their existence and turn them into something that made you a better person

5:00 PM

# 6:30 PM

Constant

Hey I got nothing but love for you, all I want is to see you succeed and be happy, with or without me. With that being said, Idk wtf is going through your head anymore, you're so god damn lost and numb that you can't even see the shit your doing to those around you sometimes . I just want you to figure your life out and be yourself. I honestly believe that you and I have grown into two completely different people, two completely incompatible people and that really sucks and it's not fair for either one of us but that party life and shit is over for me, I understand you never got to live it but for meI only did it because I didn't have anything else at the time now I got three awesome children, and priorities I need to get straight. I'm not judging you be whoever you want and do whatever you want. I want to be able to talk to you about anything and everything and have us grow to be good friends hopefully, but in the meantime you got to stay away. No more asking to smoke a cigarette with me or hanging out or doing music and shit I just can't handle it if fucks me up and then it makes it so I fuck your shit up. I think part of you has been holding on because maybe you're thinking one of these days you're going to wake up and snap out of the hell you're living in or the way you're seeing things but the reality is what is this is just who you are and deep down we're not the same anymore and you just can't love me like you used to. I've been coming to terms with it this whole time, I really don't think if I had a better job and my own place, that things would really be that much different with you and me. I know I got a lot of soul-searching to do and I need to find myself and find life after you. The shit is so hard and fucking sad and depressing to think that we will probably never be buried together, but if that means that you find happiness someplace else instead of being buried next to somebody your miserable with, then that's what I want for you. I'm always going to love you and right now it's hard for you to love anything and I feel like I'm just getting my heart stabbed over and over again. So please no more hanging out till you figure your shit out. I'll always be around if you need me and you need to talk or need help. I'm really not going to bother you anymore, cuz I can't make you love me and I can't do anything about the situation we're in right now

6:30 PM
